Free Download

If you like horror stories, missing chapters from an award-winning author's
novels, advice for writing horror, articles on horror fiction and films, and
much more, click the link and register on the next page to seize your next
Free Book today.
Click here to summon Cries from the Crypt
adamlgnevill.com
Start reading Adam Nevill's Horror Companion right away

The Reddening
Adam L. G. Nevill

Ritual Limited
Devon, England
MMXIX



‘They were the first fossil teeth I had ever seen, and as I laid my hands on
them, relics of extinct races and witnesses of an order of things which
passed away with them, I shrank back involuntarily . . . I am not ashamed to
own that in the presence of these remains I felt more of awe than joy.’
Father John MacEnery (on his discovery of prehistoric artefacts in
Kent’s Cavern,
South Devon, 1825).

ORIGINS

1
In the coming darkness, stepping off the stony cliff path and into thin air did
not seem unfeasible. Andy too easily composed the only headline he’d ever
make, post-mortem. Body recovered in harbour . . .
A mere glance down and he sensed the potential for a terrible skittering
of his feet. The earth rolling marbles beneath his boots before the sickening
plummet tingled his sphincter. Over he’d go, snatching, thumping, scraping
onto spumes of foam in the din of water that smashed the slate teeth of the
shoreline two hundred feet below.
Or would he drop silently, without fuss? He pictured an egg breaking on
the side of a ceramic bowl and winced.
Even though little had been marked or signposted across the last five
miles to offer an escape from the coast path, remaining on it was too
dangerous. The further he’d ventured the more remote and hostile the cast
of the land, so unlike the lush, near-tropical sections around Torbay, or the
long, open reaches of South Hams.
Heather now bearded the slate and shale at the top of the cliffs,
producing a vast rust and grey stonescape that suggested Scotland or the
South Island of New Zealand, not what he expected to find in South Devon.
Since the first coves of the morning, north of Divilmouth, he’d walked
the edge of an unceasing undulation of mostly bare, hilly farmland. Distant
copses had occasionally sprouted on higher ground, the silhouettes of the
trees seemingly silent and still with anticipation, like warriors watching on
horseback in old Westerns.
Earlier, closer to Divilmouth harbour, it had been the vista of an
enormous aquamarine sea that had lulled him into complacency. Nothing
could go wrong beside water so achingly beautiful. But beauty doesn’t last.
That stretch of the coast was a long way behind him now and he’d not seen
another walker since. Only a paraglider had offered any human contact.
That was at midday and he’d been packing up when Andy stopped for
lunch, three hours gone. The man had called the hills ‘the cardiacs’.
Those hills.

Rendered clumsy with fatigue by late afternoon, what remained of his
body’s depleted stamina tinkled inside a near-empty tank. Andy couldn’t
even recall how many rocky hillsides or rough stone steps he’d struggled
up. Maybe four, but they’d all looked similar and in his memory had fused
into one tortuous travail. Descending the slopes had pressed his toenails
into their cuticles: he’d not trimmed his nails before wearing new hiking
boots and was close to limping.
There had been no mention of so many hills in his guidebook, a
publication aimed at those with more local knowledge than he possessed.
Although it had let him down on each walk so far, he’d wanted to get his
money’s worth so had persevered with Spectacular Walks on the South West
Coast Path: South Devon. But what if he’d been elderly? The numerous
steep rises would burst hearts.
Forty minutes for lunch at midday was also a stupid decision. As were
the hours he’d spent exploring the first three coves at ten. His one litre of
water was long gone. This is how people get into trouble. The tone of his
head-voice was now his dad’s.
Time.
The atmospherics served as a premonition of how dark it would soon be.
To get out of the situation safely he’d need every minute of the one hour of
remaining sunlight. Then another hour of half-light to find the car.
Andy looked up, imploringly, at the light situation. Cloud had tarnished
the sky metallic, giving the sea an appearance of liquid steel. In one circular
portion of the iron cumulus, light splintered to produce the sulfur and
mercury of a Turner seascape. Far out at sea, one great shaft of concentrated
sunlight struck the water, producing a white-gold disc too blinding to look
into.
But definition along the cliff edge was growing vague. Greens, blues and
reds were being extracted from the earth. He pictured himself reduced to a
tiny figure in a dark aerial photograph, the surface murky with dust.
Wind with cold pins began to sheet off the sea, shivering his flesh.
Perspiration beneath his fleece transformed into a second skin of frost,
covering his back, groin and forehead. For all the protection it offered, his
thin woollen hat might have been a Christmas crown made from tissue
paper.
The latest edition to the new script was rain. The white horizon was
blackening. If you get wet in a cold wind . . . Shit going wrong just builds.

He could no longer use the GPS on his phone either: he’d run the battery
down by taking pictures to show his wife.
Anticipation of a temperature plummet at nightfall tightened the
tourniquet of concern further, squeezing his thoughts into choices
measurable on a three-fingered hand.
Should he go back to where he had a vague memory of a path heading
inland, in the direction of a Land Trust property? He guessed that route
promised to be a death march uphill into the interior. Then he’d have to
locate the house. Would it be open off-season? Those places usually closed
at five anyway. Or was it six?
Or should he just press on for his original goal, the nature reserve at
Brickburgh? He’d intended to cut inland from there on the sole track his
map noted: a route that would eventually circle back and deliver him to the
small Access Countryside car park where he’d left his Volvo at nine that
morning.
Though it was the best option for locating the car, the Brickburgh route
would surely involve over an hour on the hilly coastal path in dimming light
and intensifying cold. So Andy ruled it out almost as soon as he mooted the
notion. A glance at the beach below pulled his eyes to the steep shale hills
that buttressed the shore. The map helpfully indicated that two more
beaches would follow that one too. There wasn’t sufficient light remaining
to make agonisingly slow progress up three more cardiacs.
For the first time in years, he felt tearful.
A third option involved a yomp directly inland from Slagcombe Sands,
around the wetland and up the valley. But a glance in that direction invited
the question: what awaited at the summit? A bloody fence? It’d take him an
hour to get up there too, the final hour of daylight. There was no street
lighting out here. No prospect of electric light save from a few remote
farms dotted about the hills. He’d seen a couple of dejected buildings
earlier, perched atop the valleys. But distant yellow windows wouldn’t
illumine where he placed his feet on uneven ground. He’d already lost his
balance and fallen twice in daylight.
There were options, or diminishing choices made in desperation. None
were satisfactory.
He was not an experienced walker. At Christmas, as a means of keeping
fit, he’d made his rambling debut. This was walk six in two months but the
first on the wilder stretch of the coast path.

Self-loathing added to a fearful mix of incomplete thoughts. The day had
no room for another bad decision: no about-turns, retracings or hunkering
down in the wind to beseech the map that he could barely see without
reading glasses. The last few times he’d returned the book to his pocket,
he’d already forgotten what he’d just looked at: cold-wind dementia.
Option one: the Land Trust property.
Head down, his mouth a rictus, he meandered up a slope parallel to the
direction he’d just walked. The period building would be on a road,
somewhere inland, behind this section of the path. It must be. There might
be a phone. He’d have to reach it cross-country, across fields.
So turn around, twat, and walk until the darkness swallows you . . .
***
A dining room. Two figures sitting upright at a table. Painted red from their
hairlines to the soles of their bare feet, their torsos and limbs oiled to a dull
sheen. Not speaking, their eyes closed. Perhaps deep in the concentration of
prayer and giving thanks for what they were about to receive: those bruised
slabs of meat, wet and heavy upon their white plates. A fare not shocking
Andy as much as the couple’s appearance. To come so far and be
confronted by this? He feared that fate had marked this day out for horror.
Prior to this revelation, he’d walked inland from the coastal path for a
couple of hours, moving west on a muddy groove rutted by hooves in black
soil caked with dung. The odour of animal waste had become a permanent
stain on his sinuses. He’d persevered and followed the crease for ninety
minutes until the lit windows of a building had become visible atop a ridge.
As he trudged to the isolated house, the last vestiges of sunlight had
dissolved into a sky of iron. The iron had subsequently faded to coal, his
eyes filling with pitch. He’d stumbled through night-sodden fields and
talked out loud to suppress panic. Blind to the world’s forms from his waist
to his feet, he’d crashed through hedges and fallen down the sides of stone
walls, snagged himself on fences he’d only seen when bent over them.
Pawing his way over a gate, he’d scraped a thigh. That whole leg was now
wet and his waterproof trousers were stuck to stinging flesh. Both knees
were bruised.
Sometimes his feet had crunched stone chippings, sometimes grass.
Sometimes he’d slid in mud; often he’d skated through dung. His hands

were chilled to claws black with dirt. Blood from his nails had adhered the
wool of his socks to his toes. Rain had made his jacket twice as heavy. But
he’d continued, staggering about a lumpy land without light, aiming his
lurching at a far-off row of yellow squares: window-shapes that had been
distant for hours, embedded within buildings indistinguishable from the
void their lights pin-pricked. A lighthouse for a careless rambler. A farm
enclosed by barbed wire.
As he’d arrived, the big hand on the luminous face of his watch had
clicked past seven, the hour his wife would start to worry.
He’d then passed between outbuildings, his feet sliding through
putrescence, the stench of fresher faeces drifting from underfoot to seep
brain-deep, swinish with nitrates, shortening his breath.
He’d even heard a deep cough in the nearest night-smudged building,
followed by two more cries, as if the beasts within had acknowledged his
trespass through their sleep. Unlit barns? He’d only sensed solid structures
rather than identified what they were, but the glowing windows of the
farmhouse had gradually enlarged. And then he’d been standing outside a
long room: a combination kitchen and dining room.
By that time, any shame he felt about banging on a stranger’s door at so
late an hour had evaporated. Human intervention in his plight had become
necessary.
And then he’d seen them through the window. The people. The red
people. Naked red people. A woman and a man, their true age obscured by
the dark pigment encrusting their faces. Had they wiped each other red with
blood-caked hands before sitting down to eat?
They didn’t make sense, and while lost in the dark Andy couldn’t
imagine anything he’d rather not have seen through the windows of a
stranger’s house.
Dizzy with shock, he turned to sneak away. His intention was to move
silently round the building to the enigmatic front, where he’d creep away on
whatever metalled surface he could place his bemired boots upon. But when
the toe of his boot struck an object that refused to move, his hopes for a
silent escape came off the table.
Solid, immobile and unseen, the shape responded with a dull thunk,
transmitting a tremor to his knee. His body continued while the foot
remained rooted. Falling forwards, he thrust out a hand, striking the very
window that had so recently promised salvation.

Second leg swinging wide, he just kept to his feet and righted his spine.
As the hot-cold sensation preceding the fall wilted, he peered back at the
scene he’d surely disturbed.
He had.
The two figures remained seated but their horribly white eyes had
widened to stare right at him. Big eyes that contained as much surprise as
his own.
When the bulky male figure rose from its chair and pointed at his face,
Andy stumbled and fell about in the darkness of the yard.
Within moments the sound of a door latch chimed through the cold. And
under the roar of his breath, the trespasser whimpered.

2
Later that year.
Bones seeped from the cliff’s freshest wound. A few lay scattered about
Matt’s feet. Like fallen columns from an ancient temple, two great plinths
of rock had separated from the cliff-face and cracked apart on impact with
the sand. He imagined the wet thud they’d once made in the tiny cove.
Moving his gaze from the fissure above his tousled red head to the grey
shore, he tracked the path of fallen debris: broken limestone resembling a
frozen river, the furthest extent of the rock-fall hurling rubble across the
pebbles and into the sea. The cliff must have collapsed within the last week,
so how long had those bones been embedded in the rocks? Were the darker
pieces all bone fragments? Animal or human? Maybe even fossils?
He decided to collect as many of the more interesting bits as possible
before the tide took them away: the same tide that had eroded a notch in the
cliff’s foot and written collapse into its future. The new spring tide would
rise higher with a full moon, suck at the landslip and reclaim the relics.
Thirty years of coastal erosion in one month of continual storms were
responsible for this avalanche, the sea’s perpetual rage unrecognisable in
this part of South Devon. So recently had these blue skies blackened with
fury and the aquamarine waters darkened to grey before spitting great briny
gouts, day and night and for weeks, right into any face turned seaward.
Much had been smashed apart in South Devon. Comprising no fewer
than thirteen hurricanes, the sea’s maelstrom had surged over walls, bent
iron railings and train tracks, battered harbours and fishing boats into
fragments, torn down holiday lets from Plymouth to Dawlish and even
shrugged off the cliff’s heavy coats. What had been relied upon to be
benign, sheltering and gentle had reverted to assault.
Over now, the weather-front spent, the sea assumed a sheepish,
remorseful character. But the towns remained shaken and their people
subdued, bruised at a deep psychological level. No one trusted the sea. They
wouldn’t for a while. For those who lived beside the coves and the long red

beaches of the towns further north, it would take time and forgetfulness to
rehabilitate the old bond.
On hands and knees, Matt climbed into the stones and into the bones.
He’d seen the fissure two hundred metres up while paragliding in air cold
enough to bite through his face mask and purple his skin.
Conditions for gliding had been good and he’d reverse-launched from a
beauty spot intended for coast-path walkers. In seconds, a high easterly
headwind charging off the sea had raised him from standing on his feet to
sitting in thin air. As soon as his wing had flapped, risen over his head and
inflated, he’d been aloft, his stomach momentarily loosening like it was too
big and on the outside of his body, before tightening to a closed fist inside a
physique rendered frail. Up through the atmosphere he’d risen, alone and
dwarfed by an immensity of sky.
Seated in his harness, he’d looked to the green water turning milky
turquoise in one great stripe of sea. Further out the waters were stained a
bitter Atlantic blue, finally turning indigo and sparkling silver, the distant
horizon rimmed with white fire.
When he glanced back, the land lost the ramparts of natural obstruction
at ground level and appeared flatter. No matter how many times he’d looked
down upon this earth from altitude, the sight of how Brickburgh was
revealed anew always startled him. A velvet fuzz of grass scarred white by
tracks and roads. Trees imitating broccoli. Rocks at the shore lumpen and
necrotic. Cloud shadows wafting like ghosts wearing actual sheets. Grey
farm buildings imitating the hard Lego bricks that found the arch of his foot
and cramped his toes to claws when his son stayed for the weekend.
A column of air had spiralled from the sun-warmed cliff-face and he’d
stepped into the invisible, muscular core of a powerful thermal. Get it
wrong, drop into the sea and you’re dead. His mate, Bill, had told him that
when he started Matt off, a long time ago. Matt had been piloting his glider
up and down the coastal area for six years.
The cliff-fall was two kilometres east of where he’d launched and where
he’d watched the earth re-form into an aerial photo. Cliffs that were a part
of ancient South Devon. Most of them forged from dark volcanics and
shales, forming a mosaic with the regal purple, the rust and brassy pigments
of Devonian slates: rocks minted 400 million years before, when this part of
the earth was under a sea positioned south of the equator. His own county
had given its name to that era in the earth’s long history: the Devonian,

when its rocks were smelted in ancient elemental forges of fire, steam and
pressure, raging beneath oceans now extinct.
But the fissure that had released the bones appeared in a strip of different
stone. That rent gaped in the farthest southerly reach of the ancient
limestone, once heavily quarried by the Victorians: a compression of
prehistoric reefs and algae, seamed with the rusty blood of haematite.
Mining had reshaped the peninsulas to resemble the prows of vast ships and
it was beyond the last bow that Matt now gingerly picked his way.
Eying the new cliff edge above him, at the rear of the gouge, he could
see that a corresponding section of the coast path had vanished. On either
side of the collapse, the new cliffs leaned forward, chins out. It didn’t look
stable.
Gotta be quick.
The top layer of rubble was loose and the first bone he’d found he’d
mistaken for a piece of waterlogged wood, until a closer scrutiny revealed a
splintered end. In cross-section the inside of the fragment resembled
desiccated coral, or the inside of a sea sponge: animal bone that had once
held marrow. Possibly a rib from a farm animal?
Most of the hilly coastal land was used for grazing. All around
Brickburgh, herds of Black Welsh Mountain sheep roamed. Slow-moving
ensembles of ebony ponies also drifted close to the coast path. But the
bone’s brittleness and mahogany to coal-black colouring suggested age.
And perhaps a great age, thwarting his theory of sheep tumbling from the
cliff before their remains weathered above the sea.
Nearby, another bone was lighter in colour and camouflaged amongst
pebbles, driftwood and chunks of haematite. The object’s shape assured him
that he was holding a portion of a jaw; the fragment’s dimensions suggested
it must once have belonged to a beast no longer indigenous to the British
Isles. Three teeth remained. The most prominent tooth was worn, striated
with capillary-sized cracks, and resembled an incisor the size of his thumb.
A tooth compelling Matt to examine the ground about his knees more
closely.
He’d seen the remains of the great scimitar cats in the museum in
Torquay, their bones chiselled out of limestone at Kent’s Cavern further
down the coast: the very limestone that ended here, in Brickburgh.
Matt moved higher, through the rubble, filling his pockets with what
might have been bird bones or the metatarsals of land animals, until he

paused to inspect two larger objects, longer bones distinguished by heavy
scores and cuts. They’d been worked at the top too: holes were bored into
the flaring ends before the shaft concluded in a ball-joint for the hip or
shoulder of an animal.
He knew other caves discovered in Devon’s limestone had contained
multiple entrances that weather and the movements of the earth had buried
with rubble. Evidence of prehistoric animals and early man had been found
in many of them. It was feasible that a cave might yet lie undiscovered.
Matt’s breath caught with excitement. Sweat replenished itself beneath
his waterproofs and cooled.
Jesus wept.
If there was a cave behind that crack and he discovered it, would they
name it after him? No one could have spotted the fissure, unless they’d
been hugging the shore in a kayak or seen it from the air. During the storms,
the sea had been too rough for shipping, let alone pleasure craft. A giant
freighter had even beached at Divilmouth. Not even the most extreme
paraglider would have considered flying in that weather and he didn’t know
anyone else who flew this section. It was too dangerous.
So who should he tell first? The police? Didn’t seem right. No, the
council. Maybe. Or the Land Trust, who managed the public areas around
the towns and farmland? Probably them.
The crack itself was only a foot wide and whatever lay beyond remained
pitch dark. Maybe the inner space had seen no light for tens of thousands of
years.
As he drew close to the fissure, he slowed, reminded of an orifice:
bloodlike stains in the haematite issuing a sense of fleshy inner walls, moist
and intersected by the pale bone of limestone.
His thoughts turning unpleasant, his comparison switched from ideas of
a cliff vulva to those of a horrible head wound. An analogy immediately
reinforced by what he recognised as the top of a skull in the debris around
his knees. Matt shivered.
Mottled and tanned brown-black, the object sat upside down and formed
a cup, like one half of an Easter egg his son had broken apart to retrieve a
little bag of sweets. One half of a leathery egg with a jagged rim of spikes
around the broken side. But the frontal and parietal bones were intact and
still joined.

The bone was almost weightless and the exterior was also deeply
grooved and scored as if scratched by stones or an implement. And if it was
human, it appeared that the entire crown of this skull, from just above the
eyebrows, had been roughly chiselled free.
Carefully, Matt slipped the fragment inside his rucksack and folded his
spare hoodie around the object. He didn’t want it crushed under a stampede
of rubberneckers when word broke. That is, if this was important. Everyone
had bigger things to consider these days: unemployment, a collapsing health
system, the price of food, the terrible economy, a plummeting pound, the
unpredictable climate, the strikes, unrest. No one might give a damn about a
cave full of old bones.
At the mouth of the fissure he turned his smartphone into a torch and
shone it inside the crevice, again wondering when light had last fallen
inside this cave, because that is what this was: a cave.
Across the reddish floor he could see more bones, scattered as the
fissure extended into a damp funnel with a low ceiling. At the furthest reach
of light the ceiling met a tumble of rock. A restricted space, and nothing
tempted him to push inside, his chest compressing at the very idea.
Instead, he extended his arm and shoulder into the hole to retrieve what
resembled another bone with an odd shape.
Sitting back on his heels, he held the fragment in better light and gently
brushed the sides with a thumb. Bone: and he could see where it had been
snapped from a longer appendage, upon which the legs of the carven figure
may once have been attached.
The creature’s torso suggested a heavily-breasted woman with wide
hips. Part of one arm had been fashioned, the other side was damaged. But
if that was a head then it was the head of an animal. A dog, he thought: a
hound thing with a boxy muzzle. In fact, the carving was intricate enough to
suggest indents for tiny eyes. This had been made by human hands.
When Matt returned his scrutiny to the darkness of the fissure, his mind
leaped into awe at what he held.
Behind his shoulders, the sea rushed in and slapped the pebbles. It then
withdrew in a susurration across the stony shore as it had done for tens of
thousands of years before this very moment.
Later, when questioned, he would struggle to articulate how he’d felt
with the dog-headed thing within his hands. But he did offer, to anyone to
whom he told his story, that he’d never felt as insignificant. Tiny, an

irrelevant witness and a mere speck upon a great tide of time that surged
ever forward. A tide upon which he too would be extinguished: the spark of
all he was doused in less than a cosmic moment, just as the mind that had
occupied the skull in his bag had been extinguished so many years before.

3
Two weeks later.
Shelly couldn’t decide if their campsite possessed a single redeeming
feature.
The landscape was all that Greg had promised: it was open, wild, hewn
from steep valleys, framed by great vistas of sky and sea, and uninhabited.
Though the land must have been more hospitable once and even crowded
with trees before deforestation had left it barren. There had been a lot of
mining here, a long time ago: Greg had said so. But despite man’s
devastations nothing appeared tamed. Here all remained intimidating and
was as wild as it had been before, but in a different way to her eye: here
was mistreated and feral, not healthily wild.
But by the second day of the trip, what really exceeded her considerable
physical discomforts from the hike, followed by a sleepless night in the
tent, was a curious, persistent murmur of anxiety: an enduring unease not
dissimilar to mild vertigo combined with an apprehension akin to
trespassing with confident friends, while secretly wishing that you weren’t.
Maybe the strange emptiness of the land was troubling Shelly, or the
paucity of colour accounted for the dissonance, the sheer relentlessness of
the tones that she associated with camouflage. Whatever the cause, she’d
remained unable to read the land about herself adequately, to acclimatise or
orientate.
She must have moved too far from the familiar because her imagination
had additionally been lured into epochal considerations she’d not
entertained since childhood. Too clear here were reminders that she was a
mite on a great chunk of rock, one formed by distant and monumental
collisions and processes in deep space, occurring billions of years before.
Awareness of the great absences above the inert earth and the vast,
unbroken stretch of empty water unto the horizon seemed to intensify her
loneliness while making her strangely fearful.

More discomforting still was the notion that this place and this planet
were part of some divine plan and that her belittlement here was both
intended and punitive.
Perhaps her feelings had inspired a growing suspicion, too, that their
campsite was being observed from the top of the steep valley.
From the corner of her eye, the trees suggested figures that only became
stationary when you looked at them directly. They seemed to alter their
positions when she wasn’t looking. And though this odd perspective was
caused by her movements below, the imagined manoeuvres above were
hard to disregard.
Hardest of all to judge were the distances around the tent. The top of the
valley didn’t appear far away and yet she was only too aware of how long it
had taken them to descend just one side. In her memory, the very coast path
they’d walked to get here had additionally greyed into mist as if swallowing
the world they’d known. A unique set of perspectives – and Greg’s
enthusiasm for the valley had only served to increase her estrangement.
To even reach Slagcombe they’d crossed two similar beaches to the one
they’d camped behind, all three formed from boulders rolled down by
waters draining through valleys across millennia. At each beach the sand
between the rocks was as dark as emery cloth. Neither of the first two
beaches had offered car parks or public access by road, but at least they
were closer to Divilmouth. Shelly had wondered out loud if they’d needed
to walk any further, as the first pair of shorelines were empty enough for
their purposes.
But Greg had described those beaches as ‘too popular’. Once or twice
before he’d seen a few fishermen use them. And because of what a local
man had recently found in a hole inside a cliff near Slagcombe, even it
would soon be ‘fenced off’ and ‘full of twats’.
Sometime during their stay, Greg intended to find the hole that had been
in the papers.
More of these vast stretches of rubbly beaches lay ahead of them too, in
the direction of Brickburgh. In Shelly’s imagination they were all more of
the same thing, rugged and inhospitable.
They’d subsequently spent their first night at least seven miles from
Divilmouth harbour. And except for hearing the distant grunt of a
motorbike and seeing the drifting, luminous orange flag of a paraglider,

they’d had no reminders of their own species. It was to be just the two of
them for two nights: their tent beside the beach under an open sky.
A chilly breeze scoured from the sea again, blowing her hair into a
tangle and prickling her pale, untrained body. From arrival, she’d stayed
huddled inside her fleece and Gortex jacket, while occupying the sole foldout chair that Greg had humped all the way from Divilmouth.
At least a big fire had been promised to add some much-needed colour
and warmth to the excursion and its fulfilment was well underway. Where
the wetland at the foot of the valley met the stony shore, Greg was building
the pyre. He was going to cook on it: tinned sausages that would be slipped
between open buns. Shelly watched her man toil, beyond the impossibly flat
water of the marsh that glimmered like a huge pane of broken glass. Reeds
the colour of wheat obscured much of the surface. Brightly coloured
waterfowl continually flew over their tent.
And now they were back again, the stinking black rams. Their shit was
everywhere. Shelly watched the group of black lumps moving down the
valley sides towards the tent.
Shortly after their arrival, the previous afternoon, the sheep had
descended and occupied the grass around their tent, a welcoming committee
content to stare and crap. At first she and Greg had laughed, thinking the
arrival of the animals an exciting addition to their weekend adventure in the
wild. But it hadn’t taken long for the unbroken gazing of so many amber
eyes, bisected by a horizontal black slit, to unnerve her: a stolid watching
presence increasing their exposure at the foot of the valley, the intense,
unreadable eyes embellishing her suspicions that other eyes, higher up the
slopes, were also observing them just as keenly.
Shelly wondered who owned the sheep. There were farms inland and a
Land Trust house that was too far to reach, all uphill from the beach.
Perhaps the sheep expected her to feed them. Their fleeces were matted
with dung, their nostrils encrusted with snot, their presence a fitting epitaph
to the ‘romantic’ weekend. She needed Greg to shoo them away.
‘What?’ she asked the one nearest the tent, but the ram stared,
unblinking. ‘Piss off!’ she hissed. ‘You actually stink of shit.’ As if to mock
her, the animal released a stream of black balls from its tangled backside.
She would ignore them. She had far bigger things to worry about. The
row at first light had been far worse than the annoyance of random sheep
and the cold. The tense, spitting exchange still echoed through her thoughts.

Greg had even said, ‘Never again.’ She’d responded with, ‘It’s shit, Greg.
Shit. It even stinks of shit. It’s all round the tent in case we needed
convincing. I didn’t sleep at all and I’m freezing. I can’t get warm.
Divilmouth calling, mate.’
He’d paled at her outburst, called her ‘ball-ache’ and walked off to see
the quarry.
She’d only seen him get that angry with her twice in six years. Ballache. Once Greg lost it he could take days to return to himself. They had
another night to get through and the sulking was now wearying and wearing
them both down.
Shelly stood up. Her knee joints ached from being stationary for too
long in the cold. Stumbling about to ease the stiffness and to get a better
sense of what Greg was up to, she moved away from the sheep.
As she did so, her enduring sense of a distant scrutiny found a startling
definition and confirmation. A human figure was now standing at the top of
the southern slope of the valley.
At first glance, she hoped the form was one of the odd-looking trees in
her peripheral vision: bereft of leafage and made skeletal by the wind. But a
closer scrutiny confirmed that it was indeed a person up there, because the
thin figure, silhouetted against the ashen sky, was moving its arms. It was
raising something into the air.
Shelly heard a note. A single piped note.
They weren’t trespassing. The shoreline was public land managed by the
Land Trust. You weren’t supposed to light fires but ‘Who’d ever know?’
Greg had said.
Another note wavered behind her, from a distance. Shelly turned and
spotted a second figure. What sunlight seeped through the clouds no longer
smarted her eyes and she saw this piper more clearly than its partner: a man
standing on the ridge, thin, scruffy-haired and blowing into a flute or pipe.
He was naked too: she caught the hint of dangle at his groin. Across the
valley his note was matched.
There was fresh movement behind the tent. Another four rams had made
their way to the campsite as if directed downwards by these distant
shepherds.
Shelly raised her eyes towards the inner depth of the valley and
identified an additional trio of the spindly human silhouettes. They were

also naked; it’s why they all appeared so slight. What she didn’t understand
was why their skin was so dark.
Five of them now.
She called out to Greg. The wind buffeting up the valley from the sea
prevented her voice extending much further than her lips.
She edged towards the wetland. If she walked at an angle she’d skirt the
boundary of reeds and pick up the track that led to the shore.
She hadn’t gone far but couldn’t resist another look up the valley. The
numbers of their visitors had swollen in mere seconds; the new arrivals
were also now moving down the valley sides.
Shelly estimated that within a few moments a dozen of these figures had
appeared, all now possessing a sinister inexorability in their unhurried
descent. Equally distributed across the slopes of the valley and in the ravine
flowing from the summit, they walked. The beach or their tent appeared to
be the destination.
Her thoughts scratched about trying to fathom whether the situation
called for hilarity or caution, fight or flight. A spurt of adrenalin made her
lighter on her toes. She stumbled, jittery, knees clumping together. Her feet
required her full attention and without that resource she skidded on the
moist grass, ploughing dung. ‘Greg!’
He hadn’t heard and continued to roll a large stone across the pebbles
towards the fire pit.
‘Greg! Greg!’
That he heard. He looked up, his body still bent over. Shelly pointed to
the slopes. ‘We got company!’
She returned her eyes to the slopes. The naked people continued to
observe their careful side-steps. Easier to see those on the northern slope
now and in the low light their bare skin issued a scarlet sheen. Red. The
people were painted red. Red people. Naked red people. And what had they
done to their hair? That wasn’t right, having it all tufted and clawed out
from the sides where it glistened.
Most of them gripped something in their hands: small black objects. One
of the men held what might have been a staff or spear. Two others carried
the thin pipes she’d heard. They’ve come out of time.
Shelly turned to Greg for confirmation that these people were actually
there and that this was actually happening. He’d stood up straighter to see
over the wetland’s reeds, shielding his eyes to survey the visitors.

Anxiety increased a pricking of Shelly’s nerves. If she wasn’t careful,
fear would soon take hold of her throat and make her voice warble. She
couldn’t show that she was frightened. She had a notion that looking afraid
would be a bad idea. She’d not run either, she’d walk normally.
Picking her way across the uneven ground and the slippery grassy
mounds was slow going, comic even, slapstick slow, and she soon regretted
the decision not to run. To circle the marsh and get to Greg on the beach,
she’d need to make the track traversing the southern side of the valley. By
moving so slowly, she’d now meet the naked red people descending the
slope over there. They’d reach the track first.
Shelly stopped and acknowledged why she’d not run: she feared that
they would too, towards her.
‘Greg! Hurry!’
Greg was still on the rocky shore, slowly making his way to where the
marsh turned into a stream, embedded with smooth boulders. Upon his
distant pale oval of a face Shelly read his confusion. Tension had thinned
his mouth to a slit. ‘Shell!’ he called.
On came the red people, without pause, fastidious in their exodus from
the hillsides. Even though there were wide gaps within their ranks they
were incrementally forming a tighter semi-circle as they neared the shore.
Shelly was becoming trapped behind the wetland within a shortening
necklace of naked people.
Far off, at the head of the valley, two of the group had remained behind.
One was sitting down, which was odd, but Shelly lacked the clarity of mind
to scrutinise what the distant form sat upon. The second figure was standing
and had raised thin arms. All that differed between those that were
approaching their tent and the couple who’d remained behind was the
heads. At a distance, the heads of the couple at the top of the valley were
out of proportion to their bodies: were too large, misshapen.
‘Greg!’
A childish urge ushered her back towards the tent as if the campsite
possessed a private domestic boundary that wouldn’t be crossed or invaded
by the insistent visitors. She wasn’t thinking straight and knew it.
Like the rams. They just came. At you. Just came, from up there, out of
the land. Then they’re here, around you.
The idea was simple and it horrified her, as did the faces of the figures as
they drew closer: all red, the eyes and teeth too white. Their expressions

alone collapsed her resolve and her hope that it was all a jape. These people
were angry. No, they were more than angry: they were enraged. Excited too,
because they abruptly made a terrible noise. All of them started to howl and
ululate like angry apes, a commotion intimating that the restraint they had
used in their orderly descent was about to conclude.
The pair at the valley summit with the malformed heads had incited the
chorus by issuing faint, high-pitched shrieks that had warbled into a
horrible skirl. When the sound had pierced the valley their confederates had
immediately taken up the cry.
When Shelly identified what the red people were clutching in their fists,
she wanted to sit down in protest at being intimidated. Black stones. Rocks
that tapered into points.
‘Get here! Greg! Greg!’
As she looked desperately in her boyfriend’s direction, her vision
suffered a marginal judder. From the waist up he was visible over the furry
tips of the reeds. He was running from the shore to their camp.
Ahead of him, a few of the red people had stopped as if to greet him on
the beach path they’d already reached. Their tatty, greased heads and scarlet
faces seemed more monstrous as they grinned and shrieked excitedly at his
approach. There were four. He’d never get through them.
‘Oh Jesus,’ Shelly said to herself and to the unhearing universe of air
and stone and sea that surrounded her. ‘Jesus Christ.’
She’d waited too long to act and only now was she running at the nearest
gap between the two red things closest to her: women with grimacing faces.
Both were elderly, their breasts strangely plump and shiny beneath stringy
throats.
But where did she go if she made it between them? Up there? Up the
sides of the valley? Already the left side of her chest felt as if an ice cube
was lodged in a lung: she wouldn’t get far and wasn’t fit enough to do more
than crawl that slope.
Without any alteration in pace, the two women nearest to her moved
together and narrowed the parting.
Shelly stopped running, turned, looked for another route through the
enclosing corral of red figures. She ran for a space at ninety degrees to her
previous course.
No sooner had she set this course when a heavily bearded man, his facial
hair entirely soaked in what might have been blood, simply stepped closer

to his neighbour and annulled that option.
Shelly adjusted her course again and ran for the other side of the valley.
As if reading her mind, two of the red people sauntered inwards at her and
sealed that route.
The wetland. That was behind her now. She might make it. Into the
water. Wade in. Harder for them to get to you in there.
Shelly screamed, a reaction to Greg’s raised voice behind her. He’d just
shouted, ‘What? What do you want?’
Above her rapid, noisy breathing, she heard the scuffling of bare feet on
the stony track signalling a commotion, about thirty metres distant, where
Greg was.
She looked there but no longer saw Greg. She could only make out the
oiled torsos and spiky heads of the howling red people, standing where
she’d last seen her boyfriend.
Amidst the reeds of the wetland, their stained arms rose and fell, rose
and fell at whatever tried to tear itself from between them. Greg.
They hammered at her boyfriend. He’d fallen and the red people had
quickly formed a circle to smash their rocks into his body. The sound Shelly
heard was akin to the beating of a drum filled with wet sand. Dunk. Thud.
Dunk. Thud.
Her will to run died. A whiteout of shock and bewilderment bent her at
the waist so she could be sick.
Ducks flew overhead. Dusty wings flapped amidst honking cries of
alarm.
Dunk. Thud. Dunk. Thud.
Oh, God. Leave him. Please leave him . . . Don’t you think he’s had
enough? She wanted to say this but there was no air inside her body. She
sobbed breathlessly.
Dunk. Thud. Dunk. Thud.
Arcs of dark liquid were flung into the air from the tips of many red
hands, like suds cast from wet tools. The red arms went up and down, up
and down. The flapping commotion of the water fowls dimmed and the
noise of multiple pairs of bare feet slapping the turf drew nearer to her. She
closed her eyes, then opened them.
Standing upright, her arms loose and weak at her sides, her nose running
freely, she watched the red people close. Mouths open and howling: here a

filling, there a gap, purple tongues, black nostrils. Eyes too big: wild like
animals.
A moment of strange calm came upon her then: a warmth spread
through her muscles. ‘No.’ Her final word.
The red people took her down to the wet grass and began tugging her
into position.
She wanted the first raised rock to knock her out so that she wouldn’t
feel the impact of the other five. It didn’t.

4
Two years later.
‘I can assure you, in my field, no prehistorical site in the British Isles has
been the cause of so much excitement. The extraordinary finds at the
Brickburgh cave far exceed the combined riches discovered at Boxgrove,
Creswell, Swanscombe and Gough’s Cave.’
Katrine arrived at the press conference late. For a few seconds the room
was a blur of lights, unsmiling faces, tight rows of chairs upholstered in red
to match the hotel’s furnishings. Even the carpet was obscured by the
equipment bags, studio lights, cables and camera equipment littering the
floor. There was barely enough room for national press; local was squeezed
at the rear, the closeness of the air and its temperature already reaching
stifling in the conference room.
Damp all over and stressed, angry at herself, she sat at the back.
Journalist misses press conference for the biggest local news story of her
lifetime.
Unable to park anywhere near the hotel, she’d hobbled in heels through
town to get to where the press had assembled to brief the world. She’d seen
Euronews and CNN Europe’s logos on the vans parked outside the hotel.
Her press pack was on the floor. She picked it up and started her recorder.
The speaker continued.
‘We know that the cavern was used thirteen thousand years ago, and for
around one thousand years. The semi-permanence of the occupation being
the most crucial element.
‘As with other European sites, our cave was used by Late Upper
Palaeolithic people. Creswellian hunter-gatherers. They’d been returning to
various parts of Britain from France, Belgium and the Netherlands, during
warmer spells in Europe’s climate. A relatively brief thawing before another
cold period, the Younger Dryas, that ensued in 12,800 BC, when most of
Britain would have been covered by an ice-sheet, the South West a bitterly
cold tundra.

‘To get here these people would have crossed a great land bridge known
as Doggerland, now submerged beneath the North Sea.’
For a journalist, Katrine was terrible with names, dates and figures,
though she never forgot a face. The speaker was a leading palaeontologist
from the Natural History Museum in London. She’d seen him interviewed
on national news during the first two years of the excavation in Brickburgh.
Her local monthly, Devon Life and Style, would dedicate a pull-out
supplement to the revelations he offered today: the most significant press
conference yet from the dig’s management.
‘But this is the only British site that signifies a formal occupation,
including burials across centuries.’ The speaker paused as if to allow the
weight of that fact to sink upon his audience.
A few people were taking notes. Glazed expressions or contrived looks
of anticipation accounted for the greater number of faces in her line of
sight.
The speaker looked past the journalists from the London networks and
towards the back as if to appeal for some local enthusiasm. None was
forthcoming. A camera flashed.
He had his work cut out. Considering the current state of the world and
its weekly upheavals, Kat questioned for how long this story would run
beyond specialist pages and presses.
‘We also know what the Brickburgh community hunted and ate.’
Kat suppressed a yawn. Her eyes watered, blurred, then cleared.
On-screen: a picture of a grassland, bordered by marshes and small
trees. A wide, flat landscape inhabited by wild horses, red deer, antelopes,
some kind of giant ox, what looked like grouse, a solitary badger. A pack of
wolves watched the game expectantly from one side of the illustration.
Opposite the wolf pack, standing beside a marsh, a group of bearded men
were poised, their muscular bodies part-covered in animal skins. Rough
leathery faces crowned by tangled hair watched the centrepiece of the
picture: a woolly mammoth. Spears were readied.
Were mammoths down here? Kat wondered and felt her interest increase,
though not by much. It dropped a notch again when the professor presented
the next photograph, which featured a tray filled with flint tools, carved
spear blades and points. Notched spikes bore the caption: ‘Shinbones of
arctic hares’.

‘We’ve removed five hundred tons of debris so far, and over two
thousand items of worked bone and flint. The flint came from Wiltshire . . .’
Katrine’s feet ached and throbbed. She wished she’d worn jeans and
trainers. Several women had done so, including the loathsome Vicky from
Devon Tribune, one row in front. Much like her own publication, the
Tribune was 95 per cent advertorial masquerading as news. But other than
Kat, only the female journalists from the big networks were attired in suits
and heels and lavishly made up. Those higher-profile journalists would
interview the visiting experts for the networks, one-on-one: women who
exuded a cultivated indifference to everyone sitting behind them. Their
heads even appeared to be enhanced by a celestial halo created by camera
lights. A set-up that produced the near-unbearable contained heat.
Katrine removed her suit jacket but didn’t feel any cooler and wanted to
strip down to her bra. Her tights were laddered up the back of one calf. As
she’d run from the car, a tiny burr of leather in the heel of one of her new
shoes had rubbed a foot raw and fired white striations up her hose to the left
knee. She wanted to pinch herself, hard.
‘From analysing nitrogen isotopes in the wealth of the recovered human
remains, we know that the people using this cave maintained a diet that was
very high in animal protein. They were towards the top of the meat-eating
food chain. Only wolves should have been competing with them for game.
The cave lions had been gone for fifteen thousand years.
‘These people mostly ate giant oxen, deer, elk, horse meat and the
occasional cave bear. We also speculate that domesticated wolves assisted
their hunting. But . . . well, there was another reason why we called this
conference before luncheon.’
Luncheon? Just bloody call it lunchtime. Katrine suppressed a flicker of
class rage and refocused her attention on the next slide that appeared onscreen: a photograph of a trench filled with hundreds if not thousands of
bones, in all shapes and sizes.
The charnel house was lit by powerful lights mounted on metal stands at
the head and foot of the long gutter. From the pit, the macabre grimaces of
incomplete human skulls drew the eye. Jawless, they peered over the
surrounding bones at what may have been the first living human faces to
gape about the cave in twelve millennia.
‘A bank of sediment on the south side of the cave that survived the clifffall contained over five thousand individual animal and human bones,

interred together. So we can be certain that this cave was associated with
sustained butchery, operating at recurring intervals across a thousand years.
‘From the wear on the bone awls and flint scrapers recovered from this
level of the site, we know what created the myriad cuts and scratches on the
examined bones. And what took place here was a great deal of skinning,
filleting and dismemberment, as well as the stripping of tougher tendons
from carcasses, perhaps to manufacture rope or even thread . . . on all of the
remains.’
Katrine’s spine tensed. What’s he saying? Did they . . .
A camera flashed at the front. The rustling in the room ceased.
The speaker raised his voice as if his throat were dry.
‘In this phase of the excavation, the process mimicked the purpose of a
police forensic team at a crime scene. Or that of the United Nations
inspecting the evidence of war crimes. You see, the teeth marks on most of
the examined bones are unmistakably human.
‘For a settlement with a carnivorous diet, we cannot fathom why
cannibalism occurred on this scale when other food sources appeared to be
plentiful. Or perhaps there was a scarcity of food at the climax of the Last
Glacial Interstadial to account for this behaviour. But, between glaciations,
the inhabitants of the Brickburgh caves were engaged in a systematic,
industrialised practice of nutritional cannibalism.’
Murmurs gathered momentum the length and breadth of the room:
indistinguishable mutters as if the journalists were talking into their lapels,
afraid of being heard. Only the blonde heads of the A-listers up front
appeared more alert at this whiff of blood in the air.
The whispering continued until the speaker finished drinking from a
glass of water and cleared his throat. ‘To make absolutely certain that we
were looking at interpersonal trauma within this community, an extensive
forensic investigation was carried out by our colleagues at several British
universities. This established a more precise idea of how these people died.
From an eventual assemblage of single body parts, and from the angle of
the cuts in neck vertebrae, we were able to ascertain that nearly all of the
victims were decapitated while lying face-down.
‘The removal of the heads probably occurred after death. Other bones
matched to the same skulls, particularly the ribs, revealed scars resulting
from violent blows, caused by spear points or blunt trauma from hand-axes’

– the speaker paused ‘– occurring prior to the remains being butchered and
processed for food.’
Kat guessed it was one thing to know this and another to articulate it in
public.
‘But whether we examined the remains of human or horse, elk or ox, the
same tools were used in these distasteful preparations. For example, we
know that a bone tool resembling a spatula was inserted into the mouth to
break the jaws free of the skull, in order to make the softer tissues in the
mandibles accessible for consumption. And we can be fairly certain that the
facial features, the eyes, lips, ears, noses and even the tongues were
defleshed. Cut and scraped away carefully, along with the muscles
surrounding the skull on the brow and at the sides and rear of the head.
‘This technique is consistent with the processing of animals for food at
this time across Europe. From a close scrutiny of the cuts impressed into the
skull bones we can even establish the actual angle at which the individual’s
heads were held by one hand, while a second hand operated a sharp tool to
remove the flesh and soft organs from the exterior.
‘Rather gruesome, I’m afraid. It may even be upsetting for your readers
and viewers. But we must remember, despite our sensibilities in the
civilised world, that our species has resorted to cannibalism throughout its
history. Even in recent history in some parts of the world.
‘But the evidence from the Brickburgh caves chiefly indicates that there
was no difference between the preparation and consumption of animal and
human carcasses. Here butchery found an equivalency between man and
beast that we’ve not witnessed since the twentieth century in Russia and
North Korea.
‘We must remember that the brain, bone marrow and the soft body
tissues all contained an important nutritional value in cold uncultivated
environments. These food resources were extracted from the broken bones
by gnawing and chewing actions that we’ve matched to human teeth. So
these human remains were not scavenged by other animals.
‘So far, we have assembled the mostly complete remains of two hundred
and seventy-six people who died and were processed in this way. The eldest
appears to be a forty-three-year-old male who was suffering from what must
have been very painful gums, infected by a tooth abscess. But neither
women or children were spared. The youngest victim was three and
appeared to be perfectly healthy at the time of death.’

A woman towards the middle of the room stood up, apologised to those
at her side and left the room through a side door. Even Katrine wanted to
shout, Bastards!
‘This trench became, in effect, a rubbish tip, or landfill, for the discards
or unused materials from the community’s food supply. Interestingly, we
also uncovered evidence of a twelve-metre-long hearth, close to the
entrance of the cave, but the human remains do not appear to have been
cooked.’
Attention was rapt: Kat would have heard a metatarsal drop inside the
room.
‘The crafting of many of the human skulls at the Brickburgh site, as a
domestic and cultural centre, is also extraordinary. We’ve observed an
identical usage of the human skull in Gough’s Cave in Somerset, but not on
this scale. As I’ve mentioned, some of these victims were carefully scalped.
Score marks on the skull bone are consistent with this procedure. And in
twenty instances, a sharp hammerstone was used to chip away the top of the
skull.
‘The cranial vault of some victims was of particular importance to this
community. The upper part of human heads was often scraped and cleaned
before being worked into what has been called a Magdalenian “skull-cup”.
We know in more recent cultures that such containers were used to carry
liquids and as drinking bowls for ritualistic purposes.’
Upon the screen what looked like an ancient but intact pottery bowl
appeared. Mottled on the outside like a dark hen’s egg, with visible
impressions of tributaries across the inner surface, where blood vessels had
once supplied a living, thinking, feeling brain.
Kat wouldn’t have guessed it was the top of a human head if she hadn’t
been told. And now she’d seen it, and learned of how a human form was
reduced to a cup and a pile of chewed bones, she wished she hadn’t. For her
feature, the details of the butchery and cannibalism would have to be toned
down and reduced to bare hints. She knew her editor, Sheila, wouldn’t print
most of what had been shared with the press today. Their readership was
predominantly elderly, affluent and conservative.
Considering the heat and lack of oxygen, Katrine didn’t judge the
younger woman, sitting three rows down, who at first seemed to be
coughing with her head bowed. But when the barking girl was identified by
two self-conscious hotel stewards, standing at the side of the room, they

soon plucked her out of the seating and led her from the conference. The
woman had been sick, probably into a coffee beaker. One of the stewards
held a paper cup at an arm’s length. Katrine held her breath.
‘But moving on from the unpleasant evidence of how this early culture
sustained itself in a harsh environment, I’d like to share some of the rich
evidence suggesting that a sophisticated culture coexisted. One fully
immersed in its own religious rites and practices. A community that also
skilfully produced some very affecting art, artefacts and funerary rites that
demonstrate a great reverence for some of their dead.’
The speaker couldn’t get the skull-cup off the screen fast enough. A few
journalists were already whispering into phones as if they’d received a
scoop, and Kat guessed the evidence of cannibalism would be exactly that
for the tabloids. She could even supply their headline: Cannibal Holocaust:
The Prequel.
Two arms were raised near the front, which encouraged the rising of a
dozen more. Two hands clicked fingers.
‘We’ll have a Q&A at the end of the presentation,’ the speaker said with
a smile. ‘I’d first like to share evidence of these exquisite burials. Twelve in
total, recovered in the section of the site excavated so far.’
The new slide featured an intact human skeleton lying in a dusty recess
on the floor of the cave. The bones had been carefully exhumed and
brushed clean by the archaeologists.
‘Deeper inside the cave and interred within what we’ve been calling the
“false floor”, we’ve uncovered the remains of twelve humans, all female
and all aged between thirty-seven and forty-eight.
‘Their remains are in an excellent state of preservation. We can see that
each individual was carefully placed in a nest and surrounded with a range
of remarkable grave goods. Some of this material’s manufacture dates from
at least twenty thousand years earlier. So artefacts were being reused. The
occupants of the graves have become known, on-site, as The Red Queens of
Brickburgh.’
As soon as the speaker uttered the regal title every journalist in the room
bowed to make a note.
‘We’ve arrived at this term because each corpse must have been painted
with iron oxide, a red pigment extracted from local stone. It would have
been processed into a dye by these people. Ample vestiges of this haematite
have been recovered from each nest. These interments were ritualised.

‘We’ve also recovered a variety of animal skulls from each grave.
Objects that must have offered a special significance to these individuals,
perhaps even a spiritual status.
‘The first queen uncovered still held the preserved skull of a hyena,
Crocuta crocuta, and a relic at least twenty thousand years older than she
was. An animal that was once the size of a modern African lion. This might
have been rediscovered within the cave, or even brought here by the group
as they transported their culture into the area.
‘The other queens were also buried with skulls, though of wolves in nine
cases, an animal indigenous at the time. Interestingly, one of the queens was
interred with the much older skull of a giant cave lion, Panthera spelaea,
once endemic to this area. Another held the skull of the scimitar cat,
Homotherini. That species went extinct around the time the cave was
abandoned at the onset of the Younger Dryas.
‘This burial practice and culture are similar to what has been found at
various German sites. And as with those continental burials, at Brickburgh
we also uncovered a large number of manmade grave goods. Carven images
and simple but beautiful musical instruments.
‘And make no mistake, this is figurative art. Each of the flutes was
carved from swan wing bones, the longest being forty centimetres in length,
the smallest six centimetres. Each instrument has been inscribed with
precise and quite sensual images of water birds.’
A fresh slide on-screen revealed a pair of hands, clad in rubber gloves,
gently holding a smooth length of what looked like a pipe of hollowed
wood.
‘There was once music in this cave. Perhaps music was incorporated
into ceremonies, ritual practices. Maybe it was simply a source of pleasure
and bonding in hard times. We can only speculate.
‘Of the carven artefacts, we know that most were crafted and worked out
of mammoth bone. And most of the carven images appear to be
representative of the human female, though the heads of these figures are
animal. Hyenas, giant cats, dogs or wolves, we think. But there has been
some decay and most of the recovered pieces appear incomplete. They may
once have been attached to wooden staves, since decomposed.’
The carvings on-screen were upright, straight-backed. All missed hands
and feet, their abdomens tapered to spikes, but the tiny, blockish spurs of
animal ears were unmistakable. Well-proportioned, even elegant figures,

but transmitting a distinctly bestial character to Kat. She found the shape
and posture of the artefacts subtly aggressive, the worn but barking faces
grotesque, even mad with a horrible delight.
‘The last item of great interest that I will share today is this exquisite
larger figurine of a woman’s body. This item, however, was constructed out
of baked clay and mirrors similar Venus figurines that have been recovered
from all over Europe from earlier Cro-Magnon sites. Again, we date this
figure’s manufacture at around 30,000 BC, some fifteen thousand years
before a revival of its significance by this community.’
Despite the long, sensual curves, Katrine would not have described the
black object as ‘exquisite’. A torso missing its head and feet occupied the
screen. Suspended against a white background its dark breasts were
outsized, pendulous, perhaps suggesting a heaviness with milk. The hips
and buttocks were given prominence from the rear and rendered lifelike.
‘A tribute, perhaps, to fertility and the continuance of human life.’
Or its flux and the prolonging of brutality.
Kat disliked the turn in her thoughts, inevitable whenever she was
exposed to the gruesome details of human history.
Inside the hot room her skin cooled. She closed her eyes and her mind
immediately became busy with what had just leered from the screen.
The speaker called for questions.
Can I go now?
***
When that red earth of Brickburgh yawned and revealed its horrors to the
archaeologists, Kat was living north of Divilmouth, on the periphery of the
affected area. Tucked away in Moorbridge, in her two-bedroom cottage on
Kiln Lane, she’d observed the transformative power that spread from the
lightless mausoleum to the nearest harbours.
The discovery of the first cave made headlines, locally and nationally,
for a while, and perpetually in academic and scientific journals that fewer
eyes read. But two years after a paraglider spotted a crack in a cliff-face in
South Devon, the initial excitement was eclipsed into insignificance by a
greater fascination about what had been found inside the cave.
The piles of ghastly, rusticated artefacts extracted from within that cold,
pitch-black tomb possessed a unique reach and enduring resonance

internationally. Such discoveries generated stories and theories and
revisions of what was known about early man. And these speculations, both
academic and Fortean, did not quickly fade nor slow. The caves became the
biggest deal in living memory for the harbour towns of Brickburgh and
Divilmouth.
In Brickburgh, an ailing, deprived fishing port that had lost out to
Brixham’s rise further north, she’d watched the reawakening of a town all
but abandoned after the last quarry had closed in the Fifties.
Further south in the affluent enclave of gleaming yachts and whitewalled dream houses that comprised Divilmouth, the air of the caves settled
over the town like an enchanted whisper of even more gold than it already
possessed.
After the first exhibition that toured the British Isles and Europe, in
Divilmouth and Brickburgh it appeared as if every hotel, inn, guesthouse,
B&B, ice-cream parlour, gift shop and fish and chip restaurant swelled with
a horde of new faces, while each ferry, car park and narrow rural road
rumbled anew with vehicles from elsewhere.
As if the caves had called out with some silent, summoning dog whistle,
tourists from all over the world appeared again to startle the amiable,
taciturn and undemonstrative outer reaches of South Devon. We’re on the
map. Change is coming. That seemed to be the message, the belief, the
impetus. And for a time down there, anything had seemed possible. Even
out in Brickburgh’s purposeless, ailing satellite, Redhill – that tired grey
village, hanging on amidst the last working farms – the renewal that none
had ever thought possible began.
Kat saw the holiday accommodation near the harbours refurbished, the
empty shop units find new tenants, the widening of roads, the council’s
dispensing of development grants, the resurrection of ancient and dimly
remembered festivals and the arrival of a celebrity chef to open a fish
restaurant. Even the odd cruise ship was occasionally seen on the horizon,
slowly passing what had come to be known as ‘The Cannibal Coast’.
But the most noticeable changes all occurred some distance from the
actual caves. Across the twelve square miles of hilly land surrounding the
caves and where the sea’s mists smothered the coastal combes, things
remained resolutely agricultural, as they had done long before the old
quarries first opened and long after they’d closed.

There were a few hiker trails out Redhill way and they proved too
difficult for guided tours to take hold. The farmers, as if forming some
ancient guardianship of the land, had tended to renew and heighten their
border fences and pretty much carry on as they had done for some time. A
ring of wagons around the caves.
But what Kat recalled most about this time of discovery and potential
was the night that followed the press conference in Plymouth.
To her mind it seemed – and this was a mind that went to great lengths
to protect itself from the madding crowds it had once known in London –
her own past had been strangely exposed by the excavation and her
imagination infected by what had been exhumed from those caves.
***
A cold stone bed lined with bones.
A collapsed human skeleton scattered about the crumbling skull of a
hyena. Thin arms hugging the mottled and fearsome head.
Red queen.
Crocuta crocuta.
Not fully asleep, nor properly awake, but between the two states, Kat’s
thoughts had drifted through an edit of the day’s events. They always did.
Like having a television show on fast forward, she’d paused her recall to
trigger imaginary interactions: how things could have gone, should have
gone, would have gone if . . . And through that dark, ruddy ether of her
mind’s deep space, these other things, the images, had reappeared and
defined themselves.
Snout raised and seemingly wet, the head alert, a jackal-headed figure of
bone had rotated behind her eyes. The erect, footless image had even
summoned the distant cacophony of a canine skirmish from the caverns of
her mind.
This had segued into another scene of an indistinct herd of immense
beasts, in which a powerful animal had been pulled by the throat to its
lumpy knees and then onto its dusty side with a thump that had shaken the
frozen earth beneath where . . . she lay?
The felled beast was then hastily opened by a scrum of busy black
heads.
Snarling becoming laughter . . .

A dirty hand, holding a black stone, carving flesh from a human face as
if it were preparing fish.
That final imagining had snapped her fully awake. She’d assumed that
she’d been asleep and only dreaming, though the nightmare had seemed too
vivid for that. There had been a sinking into a smothering darkness just
before her nightmare: the sensation of physically dropping away from the
room, her bed. Then had come the sensation of a missed step and a sinking
into an inner abyss where that bestial head, carved into stone, had grinned
and turned. But the defleshing . . .
She’d sat up. Defleshing, nutritional cannibalism: such terms had not
been part of her awareness when she’d stepped inside that day’s press
conference. Her vocabulary had acquired a new vernacular of brutality and
bloodshed.
A few moments staring at the newly decorated bedroom ceiling, to clear
her mind of such a noisome infestation, had been required.
No doubt, a discolouration of her imagination had occurred that day in
Plymouth: a taint, reanimating memories of what she’d seen in the
PowerPoint presentation, had transformed into these dreamy scenes of her
own making. But her curiosity had stopped short of asking how the visions
had distinguished themselves by becoming clearer than dreams should be.
On awaking from the first bad dream, she’d noted the bedroom lights
were still on. She and Steve had both been too tired to turn them off after a
more intense sexual collision than they usually enjoyed.
Steve’s slender back had been turned to her. In post-coital slumber his
breathing had been muffled yet deep.
Her boyfriend had been eager to get her into bed after he’d found her
dressed in a suit and heels that afternoon. She’d smiled at that. An outfit
she’d rarely worn since leaving London years before: a part of her wardrobe
she rarely excavated. But the suit and its accessories had stimulated his
libido as if she’d become another woman, a new lover.
And maybe it had been her clothes that had also awoken her
reminiscences of the brightly lit-up parts of her former but abandoned life
in the capital? A chapter she’d only dared skim-read since moving to South
Devon, before swiftly closing that particular book.
She’d quit a career at its peak. But that wasn’t even half the story and
regret was deceptive because what caused regret was never the whole story.
But at the press conference, her old uniform had swiftly become a high-

maintenance encumbrance with bad memories stitched into the seams.
There’d been a reopening of personal tombs that she’d locked away inside
the false floor of her own mind: the falls and disgraces. Thoughts of her ex,
Graham, were the most insidious recollections of all. As a result, she’d
remained irritable for the duration of her journey home, even grinding her
teeth as she always did when she thought of him.
What Kat usually remembered from her past in London was a lingering
sinus condition with headaches akin to bullet wounds, the ethanol
withdrawals, forgetting to eat, not sleeping then sleeping for twenty hours,
her mind and mouth firing as fast as a computer processor, then crashing
and stuttering lethargically like a shitty broadband connection for far longer.
And being so weary. So tired, bone deep, soul deep.
But at least for a while, the sex with Steve had expelled the foul images
of the cave and of Graham that she’d brought home with her. Though to be
of any use the following day, Kat had known how badly she'd needed to
sleep. She’d closed her eyes and tried to get back to sleep and passed out a
second time, in a manner akin to being sucked into the darkness beneath her
bed. And her dreams had quickly filled with other curious things.
A stone axe, shaped like a pendulum, near-purple in the thin light of
memory. Knapped to produce sharp edges.
The toothy spike of a bone awl.
Thin notes from a flute fashioned from bone. A reedy lightness, beautiful
and ethereal and filling a smoke-filled darkness.
Music that summoned skeletal human faces, the tops of their heads
chipped away like egg shells . . .
The perforated bone of a wolf’s head mounted upon human form . . .
Her running, then falling, as if one leg was shorter than the other, into a
cave, into the void. Dropping into the false floor . . .
A bulbous Venus. Smooth clay turning as if on a carousel, round and
round. Curves and raised contours catching red firelight . . .
A voice in the darkness, the gibbering of a man . . . or was it a dog?
A wet thud . . . the sucking of soft tissue . . .
Kat had sat bolt upright at that point, breathing quickly, bilious with
nausea, the echo of the heavy thud resounding. From where did the sound
originate? She’d been sure it had arisen from inside the cottage. Not a noise
she’d have created herself or could have attributed to anything but murder.

She’d glanced at Steve and wondered whether to wake him. She’d not
wanted to be alone after the second nightmare.
But once brighter, waking thoughts had banished the resonance of the
wet thump, she’d climbed out of bed. After dousing the bedroom lights,
she’d gone down the narrow stairs to the ground floor.
The cottage had once been the home of a quarryman and his large
family, a hundred years gone. The past was all around. And wouldn’t local
history now make her more aware of itself? Bad memories never died. They
only blurred, became smooth and heavy and not so spiky and sharp.
The small building had been her sanctuary for a few years. Two-up, twodown, with a front door that opened onto a lane that ran to the shops in
Ivycombe: a home purchased from the sale of a one-bedroom flat in a
depressing area of London, at a time in her life when she’d given up any
hope of ever living in an actual house again with two storeys and a garden.
Her home was brightened by electricity, not kerosene or coal or wood.
Magnolia coated the walls of the warm, centrally heated building. A widescreen television dominated the cosy living area and she’d turned that on to
rebury her upsetting dreams. Had the other journalists shared her lurid
thoughts?
Kat had soon looked to the curtains and pondered what really
surrounded her home: would the landscape henceforth only remind her of
what had once roamed these valleys and of what had been done beneath
them? Was her funny turn going to become permanent?
Butchery.
Processing.
How far away were the caves from her front door? Six or seven miles,
she’d estimated, and situated in a place she didn’t know well: all that empty
space surrounding Brickburgh harbour. She only ever drove through it to
get somewhere else.
Why would she go there? No one did. What was there? Farmland.
Redhill, a dying village. Fields carpeting the rank spaces beneath the earth,
filled with the chewed evidence of industrialised murder: the grimy
fragments hidden for thousands of years but exhibited anew in her sleep.
She’d pushed back at an early-hour dread that there were no longer any
solutions to the worst places and the worst kinds of human behaviour. She’d
never ordinarily entertain such thoughts, but the early morning news had
been sufficient indication that such desperate times thrived once more, were

always striving to reappear and not only beyond the borders of the first
world. An exposure to the bloodiest episodes of human prehistory would
make anyone dream the way she had done. Surely?
Kat had turned the television off and in the sudden vacuum of silence
had briefly warmed with gratitude that she was having her time then: in a
home that wasn’t a damp cave, inhabited with reddened flesh and dirty teeth
within crude faces, where the black air must have reeked of carrion, and
skeins of smoke been backlit by flickers of firelight.
Filthy hands, slippery with the fluids of what was stuffed inside bearded
mouths.
In her imagination, the elegant modern room around the sofa briefly
recast itself as stained and streaked with charcoal. She’d winced at that,
wanting to punch her own face to knock it out of her head. She’d just seen it
all too, hadn’t she, when asleep? How did those things get inside you and
display themselves with such vigour?
Kat had willed herself to think of something else. Wrapping herself
tightly within her gown, she’d curled up on the sofa and flicked through the
local paper.
Close to 3 a.m. she’d thought of her need to redraft her feature first
thing. It was to be followed by five hours’ work in the press office of the
arts centre, at the Land Trust offices in Totnes, where she worked part-time.
And the longer she’d stayed awake the more she’d also yearned for the
sweet-sour taste of cold white wine.
That was a reckless compulsion: momentary. Easier than ever to ignore,
to wait out and let go. Kat hadn’t attended a meeting or called a sponsor in
three years. She’d not felt the need.
She’d padded into the tiny kitchen and sipped from a glass of water.
Washed some crockery, checked the door locks, made sure the oven rings
were turned off. Only then had she returned to bed.
Sleep had returned as her wariness of it subsided. But sleep had again
brought pictures and frantic motions of spiky shadows on red walls of rock.
That third time, there had been screams too and children had wept.
She’d awoken a third time and stayed awake until sunrise, stricken with
a crazy notion, the kind of idea that appears in the early hours, that when so
many old bones are disinterred from the earth, things were never going to
be the same again in that place.

EXCAVATIONS

5
Two years later.
Recordings made by her dead brother were one click away. Lincoln had
been gone six years.
In Helene’s bedroom, the laptop screen cast the sole illumination. Next
door, her daughter had finally succumbed to sleep. Each evening the
pressure to make meaningful use of mum-time quickly transformed into
anxiety, undermining the very possibility of relaxing. How determined little
Valda was to occupy those last two hours of her day. She’d never been a
child that could be alone for long.
At last, in the warm, dark silence about her bed, the residual static of
irritation generated by the nightly struggle to settle Valda prickled less.
Pebbles of tension eroded to sand in her neck, back and shoulders. A second
glass of wine unclenched her mind. Only the ghost of a grimace remained
as a trace behind her face, a fading mask. No longer committed to domestic
and maternal tasks, Helene yawned. Most evenings her eyelids dropped and
locked up shop before ten.
Partly from anger at Lincoln for taking his own life, Helene had never
played the discs spread out on the duvet. She’d been the only person
available to empty her brother’s disorderly flat in Worcester, six years
before. She’d found the recordings inside a plastic box with ‘SonicGeo’
written on the lid.
With the exception of smoking skunk and experimenting with legal
highs inside his grubby one-bedroom nest above a bookie’s in Worcester,
Lincoln’s sole and final obsession, as far as she knew, had been the
recording of ambient subterranean sounds.
Through the concluding year of his life, the search for these curious
noises had returned the excitement of childhood to her brother, until he’d
jumped from the Severn Bridge. He’d only been thirty.
When the police located his car near the bridge they’d assumed the
obvious. His camping gear had been stuffed inside the boot. There had been

no note, which was odd, and Lincoln’s body was never found. But bodies
weren’t always recovered when people jumped from that bridge, the police
had told her and her mum.
In the garage of her little town house in Walsall, provided by a housing
association, Helene had kept her brother’s effects: boxes of books, comics,
the strange music and weird horror films, his worn camping equipment, the
recording devices found in his car and a box of compact discs no doubt
crackling with weird sounds. All of it had been shrouded in polythene for
six years.
At the time of his death, Helene had been too worried and preoccupied
with a difficult pregnancy to go through his things, and her rage at her
younger brother for ending his life had sustained itself until the last five
minutes of his funeral. Only then, in the front row of pews, had a powerful
sense of him come upon her. An inexplicable but comforting sensation,
perhaps it even belied the madness of her grief.
She’d given birth for the first time four days after the funeral. There had
been no capacity for mourning since and his possessions had remained a
symbol of waste: a testament to his downward spiral, maybe even
contributing factors to wherever his head had been at the end.
Caring for Valda had been the only thing keeping her and her mother
upright ever since.
At the time Lincoln went missing, mishap and misfortune had
maintained an insidious habit of taking over her family: a momentum that
gathered pace until there’d seemed no bottom to their woes. Only one year
after her dad passed from prostate cancer and her mother’s diabetes and
arthritis flared to disabling levels, Lincoln had gone and done that. Inflicted
more tragedy upon them. She’d never imagined that her anger at him could
have served as so sturdy a mast amidst grief’s storm.
While she’d been swollen, suffering abdominal agony with preeclampsia and back pain so severe she could barely stand straight most
days, Lincoln had jumped from a bridge. Weeks away from becoming an
uncle – an idea that had thrilled him – he’d taken his own life. As Valda’s
uncle he’d have adopted a major role too because Helene would have made
her younger brother take one. They’d needed him to be around: her and her
baby and their old mum.
Helene had returned to work when Valda was three. That arrangement,
even when assisted by her mother, a childminder and fifteen free hours at a

nursery, had hardly been easier to manage than being at home alone with a
child for the preceding three years. But now Valda was showing a greater
tendency towards independent play and developing a better awareness of
personal safety, Helene had found herself thinking about Lincoln far more
than at any time since he’d died.
The postponement of recognising that he was truly gone had never
helped. The idea that he was still around was always hard to suppress: him
being out there, somewhere, awaiting another fixation or obsession with a
new group of people, or a preoccupation with a peculiar hobby. Even
without his emails or texts for six years, she’d a hunch that he’d still come
back when he was ready, like he’d always done.
Lincoln had yet to return.
His final recording was dated two weeks before he’d vanished and was
made around the last time she’d heard from him. He’d sent an email too,
which she’d since copied into a Word document:
Going back to Devon, Sisco, then I promise to check in with
Ma. Have some amazing recordings from South Dartmoor and
Brickburgh. Going back for more.
A website, GaiaCries, are going to post my collection. The
best bits. I’m getting an album on there! An album! This stuff is so
freaky they thought I’d faked it. It’s better than anything I’ve
heard on their site, recorded in all those train tunnels, nuclear
bunkers and disused mines.
Think I’m only happy inside a tent too, Sisco. I have been in a
state of ecstasy and awe in Brickburgh all summer. And no, it’s
not only down to the weed ;-)
Have uploaded some stuff for you to play to the baby – seals in
a cove [here].
Promise I’ll call mum.
Lin xxxxxxx
Mooching online, Helene had found GaiaCries, a website for
investigators of the earth’s ambient soundtracks. A forum for contributors
who set up field labs and recorded subterranean noises in a range of
uninhabited places: sound files made in disused urban structures, industrial

complexes and the few wild places remaining on earth. There were even
listings for Chernobyl and Area 51.
Down in the dark, forgotten places, the unobserved mines and tunnels,
empty shafts, extinct volcanoes and caves at low tide, it seemed there was a
surprising amount of sound produced by the earth’s shiftings or piped from
the rusting monoliths discarded by man’s exploitations. Accidental
performances with melody absent, rhythm obscure and unintended, the
instruments utterly indifferent to an audience.
To punish herself, Helene recalled her own uninterest when her brother
first enthused about his recordings. At their mum’s house, in the spring of
his final year, he’d jabbered breathlessly to her about his endeavours and
produced a collection of wires and tiny black boxes from his greasy
rucksack. Underwhelmed and frustrated with his inability to get his act
together, she’d barely glanced at his equipment.
Lincoln had always sought her approval for his enthusiasms but she’d
never offered even feigned interest. His attempts at making strange
electronic music amidst a cloud of cannabis smoke had instinctively evoked
a competitive resistance. Her hardwired habit of rejecting the past, her
hometown and the very life that she was more or less trapped inside now,
had prevented her from seeing her brother up close as a young man. Her
final act to her sibling had been to hurt him with indifference.
She’d always pushed him away. She’d never encouraged him, nor
stopped criticising him. And for that she disliked herself far more than she
disliked herself for a myriad other reasons.
The link in Lincoln’s final email had led to cloud storage. She’d checked
it at the time of the funeral. But there’d been no file of ‘seals in a cove’. Her
brother had deleted every file, emptying the account the day before he’d
jumped from the Severn Bridge.
Despite a terrifying recklessness with MDMA, at least Lincoln had
seemed energised and happy in his final year. And that was all she and her
mum had clung to. Only he couldn’t have been happy. It must have been
evidence of a bipolar mania.
There’d not been much else to salvage from his life. Her brother had
been rat-shit poor at the end with only £170 in a bank account and an
unpaid credit card debt of £10,000.
She’d never known anyone work so many terrible jobs and give up so
many terrible jobs as Lincoln had done, often quitting a position in less than

an hour. He’d once recounted how, one Christmas, he couldn’t pass through
the main doors of a warehouse on his first day of temporary work. He’d
described the experience in typical fashion: ‘a strange force’ had filled him
with a ‘paralysing dread’ and he’d known that a ‘part of his soul would die
on the other side of the metal roller doors’. He’d walked home in the rain,
made poached eggs on toast and returned to bed to eat them.
Little brother.
Helene smiled and wiped the first tears from her eyes. The turn in her
thoughts shuffled memories uncollected for decades: his freckled face, a
cowlick of hair sticking up on his crown, his cockerel’s comb, a boy,
grinning, wearing a patterned jumper knitted by Nan. A brown and orangey
haze to that photograph. Not even a proper memory but a picture in Mum’s
leatherette photo album.
But never a boy who’d stayed upset for long: that she remembered
without recourse to family photographs. When they were kids she’d
regularly been mean to him but he’d always come back to her, his tearsodden eyes doleful with a hope that his older sister would become
receptive to his prancing, restless antics once more. And how she’d made
him cry was unbearable now. That little boy. Why must she remember that?
As if it were a heavy, cold stone, remorse pressed her heart. Her pained
love for her brother suddenly transmuted into a yearning for the child in the
next room. The need for her own choked her and she vowed to never hurt
her daughter’s feelings, never discourage her, never allow herself to transfer
her frustration, her resentment, or to get too angry.
Helene stopped crying. She pushed at the painful memories until they
sank through the floor of her mind. She slipped a disc inside her laptop and
braced herself for the sound of his voice. Messily scrawled on the disc was
a title: ‘Divilmouth: Crevice above Wheel Cove & Crevice in cliffs @ Ore
Cove’.
Lincoln’s voice never materialised. A mercy, but whatever he’d recorded
was faint. She adjusted the volume, slipped on headphones and only then
did the sound of the sea, foaming over rocks, rush inside her ears.
Eyes closed, she listened to the water’s swishing entrance and its
withdrawal from an enclosed space. Nothing else existed. The rhythm was
soothing.
Helene changed the disc. She selected: ‘Cliff cave. Whaleham Point’.
The disc was labelled with a star and exclamation mark, classifying a

priority that was lost on her.
This recording contained a rumbling reminiscent of thunder. The piece
was six minutes long but at two minutes the soundscape altered and she was
reminded of air passing through a pipe. Not music, no notes, but a
continuous funnelling of air through a narrow aperture: perhaps a recording
from a subterranean crevice where he’d stuck a microphone. It made her
feel cold.
When close to ejecting the disc, her head abruptly cocked alert at the
sound of a distant voice, or voices.
Yes, what might have been a small crowd emerged, their speech muffled
by distance and by the flow of air in the foreground. She increased the
volume but no words or individual voices became discernible: the mumble
remained a crowd, passing away.
Air rising underground might mimic voices.
Thunder returned to the background. Maybe an earth movement had
caused the rumble. Without visuals or an explanation, anything could
become something within a stimulated imagination. And yet she received
her first intimation of why her brother was so fascinated with ‘SonicGeo’:
how natural sounds extracted from an environment acted upon the mind,
creating a mysterious sense of unobserved activity inside an uninhabited
place. Lincoln would also have been stoned when he’d played these back.
The rhythmic thump of something solid against a hollow object replaced
the thunder: a sound that encouraged her to picture a wooden vessel being
struck. Then she imagined that something harder and denser than wood was
being hit, like a hollow rock.
The recording ended.
Helene inserted a third disc into her machine: one marked by a star and
three exclamation marks after the title: ‘Second Cove at Whaleham Point’.
Complete silence.
She checked the clip’s duration on the audio player’s graphic: two
minutes remaining. But she was still hearing nothing at twenty seconds and
was about to stop the segment when an exhalation made her start. A tiny
cough preceded absolute silence that resumed for another twenty seconds.
An animal?
At forty-six seconds, the sound of trickling water was unmistakable. The
water may have been trickling over the rocks of what she presumed was the

cove of the disc’s title. It was unceasing for fifteen seconds before the
running liquid was joined by another cough, this one in the distance.
Only when she heard an infant crying, a noise she was highly attuned to,
did Helene sit upright and rewind the recording. She slipped off the
headphones to make sure that it wasn’t Valda next door. No, the cry had
been on the recording.
She replayed that part of the track. There it was again, behind the sound
of running water. Though surely that was the cry of a bird or an animal near
the crevice, or inside it? But, God, that had sounded just like a child. The
clip finished.
Helene exchanged the CD for a fourth disc: ‘Slagcombe Sands & inside
cliff crevice/cave @ Whaleham Point’. This one had also been festooned
with stars and exclamation marks.
The recording had been edited and began with an audio commotion: a
sequence of sounds expanding her imagination into the image of a pebble
rolling around a stone bowl, continuously. That’s what the noise made her
think of: a dry pebble, small and smooth, circling the curved interior of a
bowl. This continued until a word appeared inside her headphones.
Or almost a word: crom-creel-hhom. That was how she imagined it
being spelled phonetically. The word was followed by the suggestion of a
large throat swallowing.
And again, wind travelled through a hollow pipe. No notes, but a noise
similar to Valda enclosing a tube with her lips and blowing through it. Only
this was a thin continuous hush of air: one that grew until it filled her
headphones, right before the soundfile abruptly ended.
Helene checked her watch. Getting on now but she no longer felt tired.
Instead, she was intrigued, even unnerved.
She picked up the final compact disc, entitled: ‘Redstone Crossroads.
Quarry on Farmland’. The labelling was embellished with the subtitle
‘Money shot’. This was Lincoln’s last recording and he’d made it two
weeks before he disappeared. Helene moved her fingertips over the surface
of the disc in the place her brother’s hand would have rested as he’d written
the title.
The soundfile began with water trickling at some distance from the
microphone, continuing until it was broken at sixteen seconds by a
disturbance that might have issued from an animal. A kind of rumbling and
lowing. Moments later, when the noise was repeated, she equated the sound

to a man groaning. Though surely the reverberation was too deep for a man,
the sound originating from a much larger chest capacity. Maybe a cow or
bull?
A fresh groan lengthened before being abruptly choked off by a bark. So
something that was not a man, but maybe a farm animal or wild animal, had
been drawn to the water and had issued the noises?
Helene replayed the segment but the noise still suggested that it might
possess both human and animal origins. Before she could consider this
further, from out of the watery distance the infant’s cry reissued. Only this
time the wail was smothered by a pig-like grunt in the foreground, near the
microphone.
A bellow followed, coughed with force from a muscular throat. And
again she thought of a bull.
The juvenile cries drifted nearer the microphone. An animal imitating a
child?
A rattle deep in a phlegm-filled throat.
A savage feline hiss.
Whatever Lincoln had recorded had been angry.
Again, the hiss. Might that be a great cat?
A rumbling growl, emerging from the pit of a large stomach.
A fox? A badger? But even when agitated, Helene couldn’t readily
imagine those creatures being responsible for these noises. Though how
would she know? She was no expert on wildlife.
When the growling ceased, silence ensued, bringing her more relief than
she was comfortable acknowledging.
She suspected she might have been caught out by a practical joke played
by her dead brother. But as these were the last sounds he’d ever recorded,
before leaping to his death from a bridge, his excitable, confused states of
mind and drug use found an abrupt, momentary connection in his sister’s
thoughts: a sudden synthesis occurring between a sense of her brother and
the horrid recordings, as if a fatal inevitability had always shadowed his
experimental attitude to life.
The clip petered to its conclusion but was far from done with her. From
the middle distance the microphone picked up more of the animals, because
there must have been more than one contributor and these creatures were
really distressed. Gut-deep rumbles ascended into sharp, pained bleats, as if
expelled from the muzzles of awful, oversized lambs.

And yet was that not the snarly yipping of a dog or a fox that she was
hearing too? Though surely nothing so small could posses such a powerful
range of cries.
The cacophony grew, the intensification matched by her certainty that
the cries possessed no possible origin inside human throats. This section of
the recording effortlessly created an accompanying mental imagery: of
brawny, monstrous shapes skittering and fighting within darkness, perhaps
after detecting a man’s scent on the intrusive equipment buried inside their
cave.
Helene reached for the volume control as a series of swinish bleats
descended to a resumption of a growling behind closed jaws. Large jaws.
And what kind of mouth was she now imagining, with black lips quivering
as it emitted that snarl? An idea of yellow-brown teeth and discoloured
gums, so horribly moist, snapped at her nerves.
Helene thought of pit-bull dogs. Idiotic teenage boys on the estate were
dragged about the local park behind them. How quickly she’d sweep Valda
off her feet at the first sighting of the dogs, while their juvenile escorts
would cry, ‘Y’all right, she loves kids.’ So maybe her brother had recorded,
at a remote location in Devon, a wild or rabid dog?
Didn’t people holiday, keep second homes and caravans and make ice
cream down there? Had these noises occurred in Equatorial Africa, she’d
have found the recordings far easier to accept than their actual origins in
Devon. Lincoln’s recordings were absurdly incongruous with what she
knew of the place, which also wasn’t much, admittedly.
Without warning, a high-pitched laugh erupted from the glottal medley.
Helene flinched.
It resembled gibberish uttered by a madman, or a shriek from an exotic
animal that only sounded as if words existed within the cry. How would she
ever know? But as the noises became increasingly apelike, the cries
appeared to her ears too cruelly amused for a creature lacking human
intelligence.
Mercifully, the ‘laugh’ dwindled, until only a trickling of water
remained inside her headphones. When the clip fizzed to white noise she
was sure she’d never play the recording again, nor any of the other discs
from Lincoln’s box.
Helene left her room, walked across the landing and sat in the doorway
of Valda’s room to watch her daughter sleep.

6
Two weeks later.
Did you walk here, little brother? And here? There too? Did your scruffy
hiking boots stand upon this spot? Did you crouch and take in this view?
Did the sea breeze ruffle your red hair?
Google Maps, a walkers’ guidebook and the scribbles on the CDs had
enabled Helene to identify the inlets where her brother recorded the weird
soundfiles. At first light, she found the first two sites.
Each unremarkable cove had been near Divilmouth harbour, where she
was staying, and each rugged aperture between the sea and forested cliffsides had contained a plethora of crevices and fissures. Inside a couple of
those her brother’s microphones must have picked up the sighs and
grumbles and the tinkling of hidden streams inside the earth.
A good seven-mile hike had then stretched ahead of her to Whaleham
Point, the site of his penultimate recording. Inland from there, near a farm
at Redstone Cross, he’d captured the nightmarish animal cries recorded in
his final SonicGeo clip. Those were the last two sites she planned to visit:
curious monuments to the summer before his smile vanished from this life.
Save the bridge near Bristol, which she never wanted to see, only those
places significant to him at the end interested her. There was no time for
Dartmoor, a place he’d explored for ten months before Brickburgh. But
right here, during his final few weeks alive, her little brother had seemed
happy and enthused while living out of his tent and scrabbling round these
cliffs.
And yet, his inner life at that time remained as alien to her as the
darkness inside the caves he’d explored alone: as much of a mystery as the
strange subterranean songs that had called him here.
She’d come to better understand him at the end and to decipher what
he’d been doing with such enthusiasm. But mostly, she’d come to bid him
farewell, as she had failed to do six years before.

Four days at the coast was all she could give him, with two consumed
travelling between Devon and Walsall. As every hour had to count she’d lit
out early. Knowing that it was probably going to be an emotional day, she’d
also braced herself mentally and counted the empty coast path ahead of her
as a blessing. She didn’t want anyone to see her talking to herself or crying.
It was hard to cry at home because of Valda and she’d not had a single day
apart from her daughter in six years.
Walking from Divilmouth, she’d been struck by how the land changed,
the difficulty of moving through it increasing rapidly. Twelve or so miles
might have separated the two harbours, though, had someone shown her
two sets of photographs of the coastline, one set near Divilmouth and the
second set near Brickburgh, and claimed that the two sets had been taken in
different countries, she’d have believed them.
The land corralling Divilmouth’s harbour and its ranks of millionaires’
yachts was made soft and green by great capes of fir trees. The place
reminded her of Switzerland, but also the tropics: pines in woods
interchanging with lush palms in private gardens. A town built into cliffs
and hills festooned with enormous, beautiful houses, arranged in curving
rows above the mouth of a broad, glittering estuary: the sands the colour of
unbleached sugar, the residents’ yachts moored below their mansions. Boats
upright and gleaming like a regiment of royal cavalry, their lances vertical
and white. It’s why she’d chosen to stay there.
Initially enchanted as she’d surveyed the harbour, when she’d had time
to dwell on the matching lavish lifestyles of the residents she’d become
deferential, before eventually feeling excluded. She’d also wondered, when
these yachts had sailed along the coast in the past, if any of them had
spotted Lincoln’s little tent in one of the valleys or combes, the thin nylon
walls shuddering from an exposure to the winds that now buffeted her.
Once clear of Divilmouth, Lincoln’s final expedition had taken him, as it
now took her, up and down a hilly collar of farmland above a serrated
shoreline: a place almost bereft of human habitation for miles beyond a
handful of farms and one Land Trust property. Above the sea the continuous
range of mountainous mounds might have been the barrows of forgotten
gods.
The surface had been wind-flayed into long, coarse wheat-like grass and
brittle red heather, roamed by black sheep and small herds of jet ponies.
Thorny hedges and black trees divided the turf into a patchwork eiderdown.

Valleys emptied streams onto gunmetal sands. Crude faces, roughly hewn
from dark volcanic rock, glowered over the empty gouges of coves that
required ropes to reach.
When she was long clear of the yachts and big white mansions of
Divilmouth, even the water below her boots on the coast path had looked
unsafe for swimming. When cloud from the moors drifted west, the colour
of the sea transformed from the turquoise of Aztec jewellery to slate.
She’d passed two ancient kilns, each covered in ivy, a cement gun
emplacement from the Second World War and an abandoned cider mill. All
were in ruins. Old, ravaged and scarred, but a land no longer interfered
with.
Halfway between the harbours as she neared Whaleham Point, the sense
of solitude before such a vast sky and sea had been intense enough to
trigger flurries of panic.
How had her brother withstood it? Spending week after week here
alone? Or had he shared the remote landscape with a companion? But who?
Not Vicky, the young woman he’d been seeing in a long and fractious
relationship. A sullen, possessive girl with a round face who’d attended his
funeral and been overly conscious of what she’d looked like. Which
impelled Helene to ponder how much kindness her brother had been shown
by the girls in his life, including her.
She’d rushed into adulthood and away from home, powered by selfimportance and a slow-burning humiliation about her origins. Nothing had
worked out: her face had never been a fit in the places she’d tried to fit
herself into, opportunities had been scarce, wages low, lovers immature or
incompatible. Worn out, she’d eventually dragged herself home and briefly
hooked up with an old boyfriend who’d always been kind. Mitch. And
become pregnant within two months. He lived in Australia now and they
had little contact beyond bank transfers. He’d shown no interest in Valda.
As she walked up a slope to a distant bench perched near the cliff edge,
her thoughts ambled to the question of her brother’s untroubled veneer and
its incompatibility with the manner in which he’d ended himself. According
to their mother, the easygoing persona Lincoln had adopted in his teens, the
mask, had lasted until his death. Chilled: that’s how people had described
Lincoln. He’d even been optimistic about his future, despite all the evidence
that he’d nothing to be optimistic about. This confounded Helene. Her

brother had been a hippy trapped in the wrong chapter of history, but to take
your own life . . .
At the top of the hill she could barely breathe from the exertion of her
ascent but her brother seemed to fill her, briefly yet frantically, as if his very
spirit struggled for her attention: a sense of him that was too fleeting for her
to relish before it passed as quickly as an arresting dream that she couldn’t
claw back upon waking.
Tired and becoming tearful, she sat on the wooden bench above
Slagcombe Sands. Across the beach, the mossy claw of Whaleham Point
reared; gulls circled the limestone spur like pieces of litter caught in an
eddy of wind.
Somewhere over there Lincoln had recorded the curious piping and the
crying infant sounds. Inland, up in those stark hills that Helene turned her
gaze upon, he’d then recorded the awful screaming of the fighting animals
in an old quarry.
The merest echo in her memory of those terrible cries made her wish she
were not alone. She suddenly wanted to see a walker; even one in the
distance would do.
And where was this famous dig, the cave filled with bones that had been
discovered the year after Lincoln passed? This coastline didn’t look
celebrated. Nothing was marked. But she was not surprised that the cave
had been discovered relatively recently. There was nothing to draw a crowd
here and it was dangerous for walkers.
The sight of a distant cove, directly beneath her toes, made her dizzy.
Uncomfortably exposed to the vastness of the air and sea, she almost felt
compelled to be drawn forward and over the edge. Gravity itself seemed
different here, altered: combining with the gusts of wind it seemed to move
up and down in bands that made her too light on her feet.
Lincoln used to say he suffered vertigo merely from peering up at tall
buildings from the ground. Not once had he mentioned bridges to her or
their mother. His choice of exit from his life made no sense; the sheer
improbability of it had always made her feel distant from his death. Going
out like that just wasn’t Lincoln. But what do we really know of anyone?
Helene left the bench, her legs stiff. Even in such an open, uncluttered
space her thoughts confined her. Despite her fitness from years of
swimming, she had less energy here. A late winter cold was trapped by the
rock and bit more keenly when up so high.

She looked down to Slagcombe Sands, a gritty shoreline fringed with
ferns and a wetland filled with reeds that reminded her of sun-bleached
wheat. Where the baby cried. ‘Slagcombe Sands. Inside cliffs @ Whaleham
Point’. So maybe he’d installed his microphones in the distant dark hollows
and slits that she could see at the foot of gnarled Whaleham Spur. With the
wind slapping his head and the sea’s tumult crashing inside his ears, he
must have implanted a listening device inside one of those caves at low
tide. His older sister’s respect for her brother increased tenfold.
And at that moment, out of the very land and water, came a piercing
light. Not a warm, golden light, nor the soft seaside light of Torbay that
she’d driven through to reach the guesthouse in Divilmouth. Nor was it
similar to the bitter white light of the north she’d known as a student in
Lancashire. The light here was white-silver and pewter, like it marked a
passage into another world or time. At its most concentrated and brightest,
where spikes of sunlight pierced the cloud canopy, the light struck the
battleship grey of the sea like a welding torch, becoming too strong to look
into with unprotected eyes.
So there was magic here and beauty. Amidst her discomforts she
managed to acknowledge this. This place was not idyllic, but here was a
raw and wild beauty, one that inspired awe. Lincoln had used that very
word. Here, right here, he’d found something special.
As soon as it appeared, the brief, silvery glare out at sea was swallowed
by cloud.
The wind and sky changed everything, constantly: the colours, the
temperature, the light and her perspective of how far she’d come and how
far she had to walk.
Having recovered from the recent ascent, Helene made her way down to
the beach.
***
‘Nah, you can’t get through here. University's here most of the time, on the
dig. They don’t want no one nicking souvenirs, so can’t let you in, sorry.’
The portly security guard wore a luminous yellow jacket, its vibrancy at
odds with his glum, bored face. To escape the cold, he was sitting inside a
portable caravan at the entrance of a fenced paddock, above the caves.

‘You gotta go round. Up that track, then down the other side of the
fence. Over there. You see it on the other side? That’s where the coast path
starts again. Or you follow the road to Brickburgh that we use. Only other
way out.’
Helene hadn’t lingered. She’d disliked the way the guard had looked her
up and down with a grinning over-familiarity. She’d walked away before
the attention had turned suggestive, though not before establishing that the
excavation was on the northern side of Whaleham Point, the cave located in
the cliffs and not visible from the direction she’d travelled.
Online, she’d seen pictures of archaeologists entering the caves,
accessing the site by a ladder and ropes, or up from the sea at low tide.
Every local website she’d checked had linked to the dig and she’d been
surprised to discover work was continuing into a fifth year. The
archaeologists were still making finds in deeper sections of the limestone’s
secret hollows. There was another exhibition running in Exeter for a month,
before the newer artefacts toured the country. If she had time tomorrow she
would go: maybe first thing before she drove home.
But when Helene reached the security fence, what startled her to a
standstill was the realisation of how close Lincoln had camped to the
Brickburgh dig. During his final fortnight alive and while making his
penultimate recordings, her brother had planted his devices around the dig
site. Throughout an entire summer six years before, her little brother had
been recording on the side of Whaleham Point opposite to where
archaeologists were now clawing out the earth to find so many long-hidden
bones. Had her brother returned the following winter, after the cliff-fall, he
might have discovered the cave. And had he done so, his life would surely
have followed a different path.
Unlucky and typical of Lincoln but somehow his proximity to such an
important historical discovery made his death appear strangely significant
to Helene, as if a new epitaph now competed with his leaping from a
bridge.
From the dig, Helene moved three miles inland, retracing her brother’s
footsteps to the place where he’d made the final recording and where the
first leg of her hike would conclude.
The GPS on her phone bade her follow soil paths worn the colour of
drying blood: tracks scarring hillsides increasingly used by farm animals,
judging by the copious black droppings scattered around her boots.

At some point in the nineteenth century there had been quarrying here.
According to her guidebook, a stone was mined and a pigment extracted
from it for the manufacture of dye and paint. And it must have been inside
one of those disused quarries that Lincoln had recorded the bestial shrieks.
***
The hound leaped, again and again in an effortless propulsion from all four
legs, its reddish eyes drawing level with her own.
Elbows out, hands raised to protect her throat, Helene gave pitiful cries
that only excited the barking dog, a big rangy creature with a liverish
colouring that suggested a Dobermann, though she’d never seen one as big
as this. As it menaced and herded her deeper into the hedge, even with all
four paws on the ground its head was still higher than her waist. She twisted
to conceal her exposed skin from the foamy teeth and the dog immediately
appeared on her other side, to leap before her face once again, untiring,
insistent.
Through her panic-blurred vision, she noticed a blue figure run from the
driveway she’d just walked past. There had been a white van, its bonnet
open, parked before a dilapidated house.
‘Kent! Kent!’ It took Helene a moment to realise the man wasn’t
shouting the name of an English county, but calling the name of the hound
barking into her eyes.
The dog ignored the call, continuing to spring up and down, up and
down, higher and higher to match its uncontainable excitement.
With her shoulder blades flattened against a stone wall, Helene’s head
completely disappeared inside overhanging wisteria.
Through the screen of verdure, a man came into sharper focus, dressed
in a dirty overall, unzipped at the front, with a ragged red jumper hanging
loose beneath. A bearded face loomed. There was something odd going on
with his eyes, but she didn’t see much more because the dog snapped its
jaws through the vines, an inch from her nose. She dropped into a crouch,
hands over her skull.
Yelping, the dog was pulled away, the owner’s grimy boots sloshing
through scarlet puddles where the tarmac was worn to mud. A chain was
clipped to the dog's collar.

Up on its hind legs, straining, the hound still matched its owner’s full
height and like a horseman he applied all of his strength to hold the lead
while the dog tottered like a kangaroo, both choking and barking.
Helene shrieked when two more dogs of the same breed turned from the
driveway and ran at a low, fast trajectory at her legs. They stopped just
short of her body and appeared to smile at her distress. Their tails,
mercifully, were wagging.
A thin woman followed them, her body also covered in an overall, shiny
with oil stains to the knee. At first glance she was a waif with unkempt
blonde hair but she grew older as she drew closer, until her skin was riven
with deep clefts about her eyes and nose and heavily freckled. Too much
sun. Even with the elfin bones of her worn face keeping her handsome, she
must have been in her fifties.
‘Kent!’ the man shouted again, then, ‘Private road!’ at Helene.
Two of the sinewy dogs retreated to the woman. Like a current they
swilled around her booted feet. She came to stand beside Helene, her
position obscuring the road ahead.
The bearded man moved beside the woman, crowding into her, his dog
restrained on a shortened chain. The positioning of the people, so
uncomfortably close to her, was as discomforting as the presence of the
enormous dogs.
Now she could see him clearly, the man might have been blind in one
eye. One of his eyeballs was bisected by an oyster-coloured scar, the
surrounding sclera grey. A pale-blue iris existed as a residue of his former
sight and the eye peered down as if in shame. Around and under his beard
his skin was red, his facial hair speckled with flakes of dead skin. A wispy
ponytail collected his hair at the back, thinned to several bootlaces on top of
his scalp, scraped across the narrow red skull. It looked like psoriasis, his
rage further inflaming the skin condition.
‘Private road! Private road! Private road!’ he roared at Helene. Tiny
balls of salivary foam speckled her eyes and made her blink. He was worse
than his dog. ‘How the fuck did you get in?’
The woman softened her expression of fearful concern to pity. When she
touched the man’s arm he quietened and stepped back.
‘What do you want?’ she asked softly, in what might have been
sympathy but her eyes remained cold. Their accents were also immediately
incongruous: even with voices raised they suggested the upper middle class.

In stark contrast to their tatty, dirty appearance and the wretched state of the
farm buildings that Helene had assumed were deserted, these people were
posh.
‘Can’t you read?’ The man pointed the way she’d just walked, a distance
of no more than fifty metres.
The thin woman caught his eye. ‘The gate must have been left open. She
wouldn’t have seen the sign.’
‘Richey! Fucking retard!’ the man spat at the woman at his side. ‘How
many times has he been told to close that bloody gate?’
Helene hadn’t noticed a gate, let alone a sign. So overgrown was the
hedgerow she’d not looked at the sides of the lane. Relieved to see a road
after passing up through woods to reach the crossroads, she’d merely
walked south to where she guessed the quarry would be. She’d assumed she
was on a public road.
The bearded man turned down the volume but his anger maintained
itself as an ugly sneer. ‘Who the bloody hell are you? What are you doing
here?’
Helene straightened and stepped out of the overhanging wisteria.
‘Walking. I was just walking.’ She took the guidebook from the pocket of
her coat. ‘I didn’t know. . . I thought the road might go to the quarry.’
Her interrogators looked at each other, then at her book. The woman
snatched it from her hand without asking. She looked at the page Helene
had marked with a post-it, then showed the man, who stared at Helene as if
he’d just caught her stealing.
‘I just wanted to see the old quarry.’
‘Well, you can’t! This land is private!’
It may have been thin and forced but at least the woman managed to
smile. As if weary of his ranting, she touched the man’s elbow again.
‘There’s nothing left,’ she said. ‘A half-demolished kiln. All overgrown.
Some big scars on the earth. They’re only visible from the air and they are
not open to the public.’
‘I’m sorry. I didn’t know. I was just walking. I didn’t know. I’m sorry. It
doesn’t look like a private road.’
‘Where did you come from?’ the woman asked, her stare unwavering.
Helene had to think. In her agitated state she thought she’d been asked
where she was from. ‘Walsall’ slipped out. Then she corrected herself. ‘The

coast path. I’m staying in Divilmouth. I just wanted to see the quarry before
I walked back.’
The couple seemed to relax at that, as if realising they’d only confronted
a harmless idiot, but the smirk within the man’s scratchy beard boiled
Helene’s relief into anger.
‘Was all of this necessary? Do I look like a bloody thief? Jesus Christ!
It’s an easy mistake to make. The path from Whaleham Point leads here.
My book says there’s a quarry. Redstone Cross.’
It must happen all the time, she wanted to say, and then realised that the
violence of their greeting was sufficient indication that it probably did.
The man released his dog.
Helene gasped, flinched.
The hound ran off to find the other two, but its owner clearly enjoyed the
sharp and visible ascent of her fear. Trying not to betray her amusement, the
woman dipped her face to read Helene’s map.
‘The track for walkers you used from Whaleham is the original lane. An
old green track. But this road is private and always has been. That gate
should not have been left open.’
The man jerked his thin ferrety head behind him. ‘There’s nothing down
there. Nothing.’
Two other men wearing raincoats and Wellington boots appeared outside
one of the dilapidated wooden buildings, farther down the lane. They came
to a standstill, content to watch at a distance.
The woman touched Helene’s forearm to reclaim her attention. ‘There
are two public lanes. One goes north to Brickburgh. They use it for the dig.
The other one heads west but there’s nothing that way until Divilmouth.
See, here. If you’d carried on down this road you’d have an awful long way
back to Divilmouth in the dark. We’ve done you a favour.’
‘A bloody big favour,’ the man said, then seemed to think better about
embellishing the admonishment and looked to his dogs instead.
‘I see,’ Helene said. Shock wilting, she now felt chastened and out of her
depth: an unwelcome outsider that worried sheep and left gates open. A
trespasser. She wasn’t sure she’d ever trespassed before but Lincoln must
have done to make his final recording. He’d either walked further down this
private road or approached the quarry through the beard of woodland
beneath the farm that her path had partly circumscribed. At the meagre

crossroads, she could now see how walkers were supposed to walk straight
on or turn right and not left as she’d done.
Helene thought of mentioning her brother. But explaining that he’d been
here the week before taking his own life was a story she didn’t want to
share with hostile strangers whose private road she’d traipsed across.
She peered over their shoulders at the few miserable buildings in the
distance: dark wood and grey stones at a slouch. A door sagged, green with
mildew. From beneath an awning, the black face of a ram peered back at
her.
The woman caught her interest. ‘You better get going. I’d advise
heading back the way you came. Or walk to Brickburgh and catch the bus.’
Helene nodded, tersely thanked the woman for her help and hurried
away. Retracing her footsteps, she glanced at the house she’d passed on the
way in. A building that seemed to have been transplanted from the Deep
South of America, intact with peeling porch, shuttered windows and
neglected laundry haggard from days and nights left on the wire. A myriad
engine parts were strewn across overgrown lawns. When she’d come up
she’d thought the house eerie but strangely enchanting.
Going out she noticed part of a gate and the back of a white sign riveted
to a metal rung. Both had been pushed deep inside the overgrowth so that a
vehicle could drive through.
Her hands were trembling. Helene tucked them inside her pockets, her
urge to return to the coast path desperate. She might even run down the
valley. The encounter had come close to spoiling the entire day, the wild
land she’d walked since dawn acquiring a sudden, unwelcome association
with the awful sounds on Lincoln’s recordings.
But her new respect for her brother and his daring deepened: he’d
camped out here for weeks, in the wild, where horrible pricks lived, which
also made her wonder if he’d crossed paths with the posh nutters and their
terrifying dogs. Maybe those very dogs had sniffed out his equipment.
Could a dog have made those sounds?
Before she picked up the green path to Whaleham, Helene looked back.
The vicious man and the dogs had gone but the thin woman had remained
in the lane to watch her leave.

7
The occupant’s lengthy unlatching of the front door was Kat's first
indication of trouble. When the barrier eventually opened, a haggard face
appeared in the gap. A pair of faded blue eyes studied the street.
In a prickly seizure of mortification, Kat believed she’d knocked on the
wrong door in the row of identical former miners’ cottages. The quartet of
doors, in the lane adjacent to the main thoroughfare of Redhill, were all
painted brown and studded into uniformly grey stone facades.
She rechecked the number on the door – 4. Right house, so maybe this
was one of Matt Hull’s elderly relatives standing on the threshold.
When the door widened and became an invitation to enter, the frail
figure spoke softly. ‘Hey, Katrine. Good to see you.’ Only then did she
recognise the paraglider.
She’d interviewed him two years earlier at the first Brickburgh cave
exhibition, when the cave’s discovery wrote international headlines. Two
years prior to the first exhibition, it was Matt Hull who’d directed the light
from his phone inside a cliff fissure and revealed a cave filled with
prehistoric artefacts. When the broad, sparsely populated spur on the
Devonshire coast had drawn the eyes of the world, they’d lingered on this
man for a few weeks. He’d become a celebrity overnight.
Two years after their interview, she found herself startled by Matt Hull’s
appearance. Maybe a serious illness had subsequently harrowed the
diminutive figure on the doorstep to this form: redrawn as worn and
sticklike, the facial skin craggy. She remembered him being small, slim and
muscular, but the sleeves of his shirt now sagged from a pair of wasted
arms. Above his belt his shirt billowed over empty space.
What she recalled was a working-class man with a warm smile. A local
character, case-hardened by manual work and misfortune, divorced and
shaken by the trauma of his family breaking apart, yet gentle. She’d been
impressed by his resilience and the quiet wisdom he’d evinced: a father
devoted to his boy, who’d accepted the breakup of his marriage in order to
stem his own bitterness, to catch it in time.

A painter and decorator, too, who crafted exquisite furniture as a sideline
from materials foraged in local woodland. Addicted to another hobby,
paragliding, in his thirties, he’d originally described himself to her as a man
happier in the sky than upon the earth. That kindly impression had lingered
and she’d looked forward to his company today.
A very different impression was forming now. The village he called
home had altered just as much, albeit in another way entirely.
Redhill was the nearest settlement to the Brickburgh dig and though
she’d not been back to the village since their first interview, its regeneration
surprised her.
Composed of six streets, five curling about the main road and petering
out into tributaries blunted by farmland, Redhill had since laid claim to a
grocery store and a pub. Three houses had been converted into hotels. A
nearby field was now a large campsite for motor homes, tents and glamping
huts. Messy lines of performance vehicles choked the narrow lanes. Several
building sites dotting the village’s outskirts revealed the bones of large
detached houses undergoing assembly upon the bare red earth. Swimming
pools were being dug in expansive gardens. If Matt Hull’s discovery of the
caves had led to this level of prosperity in a decaying village, the crumpled
figure on the doorstep appeared to be the only thing remaining in Redhill
moving in the opposite direction.
Feeling as delicate as if she were visiting someone in hospital, Kat
lowered herself carefully into an easy chair in the small front room that
opened onto the road. To put them both at ease she accepted Matt’s offer of
a hot drink, though when she inspected the contents of the mug that arrived
after some delay, there was no milk in the instant coffee. She also detected
the presence of several spoonfuls of sugar. She’d asked for tea, milk, no
sugar.
Through a connecting doorway she’d watched her host’s slow
preparation of the drinks, his rough, shaky hands scattering the unasked-for
sugar. Perhaps the soul within the tired shell had been subjected to some
whittling from painful preoccupations. As a sufferer from anxiety and
depression herself, she allowed herself to presume as much, knowing too
well what fatigue and exhaustion looked like and how simple movements
became painful exertions.
Dull, tired and too heavy for their sockets were the eyes that soon
confronted her, their light reduced, snuffed by what throttled the mind

behind. His attention was either projected beyond the room or back inside
his skull, giving his worn face the appearance of vacancy. And when he was
seated, his knees jumped and hands trembled without cease. That looked
like Parkinson’s. His fingers only calmed to roll a cigarette.
‘You still fly?’ Kat asked.
‘Stopped all that.’ His words accompanied by a wince that nearly shut
an eye. ‘Been put off . . .’
Katrine maintained a cheery tone. ‘Tell me you still make that beautiful
furniture. I still think about the table you’d made from mountain ash. If I’d
had the space at home I’d have bitten your hand off.’
The smile Matt attempted required too much effort, which made Kat
unsure whether to ask after his boy. The man’s domestic situation might be
the cause of his current plight. During their first interview most of what
Matt Hull had confided was about his son. When she couldn’t think of
anything else to say, her nerves prompted, ‘Your son doing okay?’
He calmed a fraction at the mention of his child. ‘Colin’s doing well,
yeah. Cracking little rugby player. He’ll play for the county at Colts. Sailing
too. Really taken to that.’
‘Great. How exciting for both of you.’
The twitching resumed. ‘I’m only here because of my boy. He’s with his
mum in Brickburgh. I don’t want to be any further away.’
Kat fidgeted to stir her own mind into less of the blank it was intent on
becoming, which prompted him to add, ‘I can’t talk about it any more. Not
in the way we did.’ His doleful gaze rose from the end of his cigarette. ‘The
caves. It’s something I try not to think about. Without much success, it must
be said. Gotta move on, though. At least try. Been over four years. Colin’s
my priority.’
‘Of course.’
But if talking about the dig was off the table, Kat couldn’t fathom why
he’d accepted her request for a follow-up interview. The magazine had
space for a few comments to augment her feature on the second exhibition,
a showcase of finds from the excavation’s second phase, housed in Exeter
Museum. Most of the article would be pictorial. A chat over the phone with
the man who discovered the cave would have sufficed. At best, Matt Hull
was a footnote in the cave’s history, his name rarely mentioned now. But
when she’d called him, he’d insisted they meet at his home.
‘I will say I wish I’d never found it.’

Tense, her awkwardness increasing with the cooling of the terrible
coffee in her hand, Kat struggled to respond. ‘I’m surprised to hear you say
that, Matt. I really am.’ She braced herself for a story of how finding the
cave had brought him nothing but misery.
‘A few years back, I never thought I’d hear myself say it either.’
‘I’m curious about what’s changed for you.’
‘This off the record?’
‘If you like. I was only looking for a follow-up comment. A then-andnow quote because of what the site has clearly done for the area and
economy. I have to say, I’m a bit taken aback at just how rapidly the village
has changed. It’s almost unrecognisable from two years ago.’
Matt nodded, smiling a wry acknowledgement as if she’d hit upon the
very thing, though she had no idea what that might be.
‘The article will only be about the new finds,’ she offered. ‘I take it
you’ve heard the hints about what they found in the new caves? So I
thought you might want to contribute something. A few words. None of the
new developments would have been possible if you’d not been flying over
there.’
Matt returned his attention to the end of his cigarette and his smile
vanished in the trail of smoke, his face turning an even unhealthier grey.
‘Matt, are you all right? You seem . . . very tense.’
His lips moved for a while but he didn’t speak out loud.
‘Would another time be better?’
He pulled on his cigarette in an attempt at composure, though one
betrayed by a shaky hand. ‘For the first exhibition I was interviewed in all
the local press. TV, radio, the works. I was on the BBC too. Sky,
everything. In America too. All over. I was at all the UK openings.’
‘I know.’
‘But back then, you were the only person I spoke to who was different.’
‘I’m not sure what you mean.’
‘In all the excitement you saw things a bit differently. About the cave.
That was my impression.’
Katrine scoured her memory to identify what signals she might have
transmitted to him during the first interview.
‘I’m good at reading people and you had a bad feeling about what they
found. And I remember you telling me that you came down here for a new
start, away from the city. London, was it?’

Kat nodded.
‘You’d had it hard there. That’s what I felt. I think a person who’s had a
bad time of it makes a particular kind of impression. Like I did after the
breakup with my wife. Makes you tuned-in to others too. Their distress, you
know? You said you’d been through something similar to me. Bad
relationship. Even if you’d said nothing specific, I’d seen it in your eyes. It
made you sensitive . . . to people, situations that could cause you more
trouble. Instinct sharpens. Sixth sense, yeah. Same with flying. I just knew
when to call it a day if things didn’t feel right on the cliffs. I knew.
‘And no matter how much time passed between when the caves was in
use and me finding that hole, you suspected something was off about the
place. Because of all the terrible things that happened there, even such a
long time ago, you still knew what they found wasn’t for gawping at or
raking over. The caves still had a kind of . . . I don’t know, power. Like they
wasn’t dead.’
Kat shifted her position and couldn’t prevent a noisy swallow.
‘Down there by the sea, that place was special, you know, like . . .
Stonehenge or something, to people in the past. And when I got over the
adrenalin of finding the skull and that little carving, it hit me too, in a weird
way. That all took a while to sink in. Maybe even a year. But things
changed for me. Lots of things. They never stopped changing.’ His rapidly
blinking eyes paused to watch her with so keen a scrutiny that Kat coughed
to create a distraction.
Matt was unstable. What he said next confirmed her diagnosis.
‘Morbid. From that time onwards, my thoughts were very morbid.
That’s when it started. And I’d never thought about things in that way
before. I can assure you of that. Strange, I felt strange, here. Here was
different afterwards. And I got a sense that you felt something similar. You
didn’t even like thinking about what they’d dug up. I remember that as clear
as day. What was done in there, in that dark, horrible place, should have
stayed buried. And no good will come of them digging up any more of
what’s down there.
‘You remember, we ended up talking over our problems? Me mostly,
about my boy. But your ex came up. It was like we were always avoiding
the real subject of the interview, which was the cave.’
An unusual observation but Matt was right. After the press conference in
Plymouth Kat hadn’t wanted to cover the first exhibition two years later.

She’d have been happy to skip the new revelations, the latest cycle of
prehistorical horror.
Initial reports and rumours suggested that what had been uncovered in
the Brickburgh cavern during the previous two years was even more
barbaric and gruesome than what had been excavated at the first level. But
she needed the money. Steve needed work for his portfolio too. And as
affable as Sheila, her editor, was, she was not to be defied. The assignment
was always going to be Kat’s.
Matt pulled on his cigarette. ‘It’s different for me. I’m local. I live on the
same land as the caves. That place is only a few miles from where I sleep.
But you ain’t that far away either. And there’s miles of tunnels down there.
They reach out, like.’
‘Miles?’ Not to Kat’s knowledge. And though a larger chamber had been
found and several annexes attached to the first cave, she was curious as to
what brought Matt to this conclusion.
‘We’re separated from what happened by thousands of years, Matt.’
‘You tell that to my dreams.’
‘Dreams?’
‘Dreams. What got inside me. My moods too.’
‘I don’t understand.’
‘Or you don’t want to. But I wanted to tell you a few things that you
can’t print. This, today, is not for that, for the news and all that. The
magazine. You wouldn’t get it in there anyway. Your readers would think
I’m mad. Maybe I’m going that way but this is something I wanted to tell
you. Only you, because I think you might get it. And today is also for
insurance.’
The Brickburgh Curse. She wondered if his imagination had dialled
itself into that story. Did he believe that his mind had been influenced by his
proximity to the cave? These would have been her questions on a
professional basis. His answers might even add an interesting local angle to
the better-known stories circulating about the fate of several members of the
archaeological team, who’d spent so much time underground in the early
period of the excavation. But that would be unsuitable for Devon Life and
Style. Sheila had little time for the conspiracies. That was the preserve of
the internet and the tabloids. Life and Style, or L&S, filled its glossy pages
with coastal vistas, restaurant reviews, local conservation. Not features on
curses, unless it was a cosy ghost story, something cheesy about a lady in

white in a castle tower. Over the years, her editor had even managed to
erase any mention of the cannibalism in any story related to the caves. That
didn’t fit with editorial direction or the publication’s tone. L&S’s sole focus
had been on the carved artefacts, the bone flutes and the idea of primitive
music, the opportunities for upscale tourists. This time around, the feature
would be dedicated to the incredible cave paintings. Some details of those
had already surfaced. ‘Insurance?’ she ventured.
Matt nodded. ‘There’s no one else I can say this to. Not round here.’
‘No neighbours, a friend?’ She stopped short of suggesting a GP.
He cleared his throat to speak, circling a trembling hand around his
head. ‘It’s hard to explain.’
Kat pondered making an excuse and leaving but there was a conviction
in what Matt was trying to impart: to her, only to her.
‘It’s more surface with some folks. An attitude that covers something
deeper. Only I don’t know what. I can identify the signs though. Maybe you
think I’m paranoid or something but I don’t think it’d be in my best
interests to mention any of this out loud, not round here.’
‘You think you’re in danger?’
Matt chuckled humourlessly, then whispered, ‘I’m a bit past figuring
that out.’
‘Because of the caves?’
‘There’s a connection. But I think this vibe has been round here for a
while. In other things. Other business. Hints of it. An atmosphere is what
I’m talking about. Like an influence. And it’s got this kind of momentum
now. Even if it was mostly buried in those cliffs, maybe it was the cause of
the change. As well as the other stuff that’s been happening. Here.’
Kat frowned. He’d lost her.
‘It’s like something was restless, you know, in them rocks. In the spaces
between them. How deep they go and keep on going . . . all that’s buried,
you know, could still come out a bit. That’s what I reckon. Been that way
before I found the cave. There’s lots of local stuff you don’t know about.’
Kat's disappointment and pity came close to a physical manifestation, a
sensation akin to indigestion. Matt Hull wouldn’t be included in the article
at all: that was clear to her. She also worried that if he didn’t get it together
as a parent, he’d be facing problems with access to the most important
person in his life, his son. She found that idea unbearable; it would destroy
what was left of the twitching man on the worn leather couch.

‘You see, Kat, I’ve had a privileged perspective. If privilege is the right
word. Up there, in the sky, I’ve seen things. Seen a lot of things. They know
it. My gear is bright orange. It was always hard to miss me when I was
airborne and I’ve been all over, all round here, twenty miles in every
direction. I’ve noticed stuff.’
Kat’s discomfort merged with bewilderment. Curiosity was the only
thing keeping her in the room.
‘There are things I’ve seen that I won’t mention to you. Things that’d
bring some real trouble down on me and on the people who are important to
me. Stuff that goes on round here. Things that make people desperate to
protect their interests, if you follow. Ruthless. And they have been ruthless,
at times. I know they have been. But that’s got nothing to do with me or my
boy. So I always looked the other way. Always kept my head down. Told
them that too when they’ve confronted me about flying round here.’
‘I’m not following, Matt.’
‘That’s . . . just background. You probably know how some folks make
their money round here. That’s not what this is about, not what I wanted to
talk to you about. Forget it. That’s something else.’
Now she got it: illegal activity. Unlicensed alcohol: she’d heard the
rumours. And the talk about cannabis farms. That’s what Matt was alluding
to, the drug farms. She’d never believed there was much validity to the
rumours but assumed a kernel of truth existed at the root of the tales. Not
everyone was content with fruit picking, serving in a café, emptying
bedpans in care homes or selling ice cream on the beach for £3 an hour.
Hydroponics in a loft was, allegedly, a traditional income stream north of
Divilmouth.
‘There’s a connection, yeah. One thing getting into another. The caves
have already seen to that. That’s what I am saying. And then bad places and
hard people get worse. More lines get crossed, until what’s done on the
other side of the lines becomes normal. Part and parcel. Perfect
environment was in place here. This is what I am telling you. You’d not
notice if you were only passing through, like a holidaymaker. But if this
was your home, you’d get it. And you get noticed by it too, because it
spreads.’
No matter how subtle she’d tried to be, Matt caught her inspecting her
watch.
‘This is hard for me to say, Kat.’

‘Can you tell me something more specific about what is upsetting you so
much?’
Before he spoke again, Matt looked at the floor for the best part of a
minute before sighing resignedly. ‘Not long after I found that cave, I was
told that the sky, the actual air, yeah, above Brickburgh, was out of bounds
to me. All of it.’
‘By who?’
‘I’m not getting into that. For your sake, not mine. Trust me, girl, you
don’t want to go there. But why did they want to ground me not long after I
found that cave? I already knew what they were doing round here, on some
of the farms. I’d seen parts of their operations, yeah. They let that slide. I’m
talking about other things . . . things that have happened that they never
wanted anyone to see. The bigger changes is what I am talking about. The
change is common knowledge here.’
Kat’s skin chilled. She didn’t want to hear any more. A horrible
suspicion of becoming implicated in an unpleasant racket or local feud
seemed to alter the air pressure around her head. She was a lifestyle
journalist, her specialty being fashion, luxury properties, holidays, not
organised crime. ‘I’d rather not . . . I’m not sure I want to . . . not sure this is
in my brief –’
‘They don’t want me flying in case I see something as bad as I have
already. And they aren’t the kind of people you can disagree with. A heavy
presence. Their spies here, they have this air about them too. Call it a tone.
Just looks and things, you know? But people have been getting hurt, Kat.
Here. Since I found that cave. Before that too, I reckon. That crack in the
cliff wasn’t the only opening, yeah, to what’s down there.’
Katrine’s body tensed. ‘The police? I don’t know what it is you’re trying
to tell me, Matt. But maybe you should go to the police.’
‘As I said, things have changed. You can’t be sure who already knows
stuff. Who’s on which side now. This goes deep. It’s spread wide.’
A confused conspiracy, that’s all it was, whipped to critical mass by a
shut-in’s paranoia. But something Matt said earlier continued to work at her
mind as a source of discomfort, like a stone in a cerebral shoe. ‘Dreams.
Matt, you mentioned your dreams?’
Though she was keen to change the subject from the topic of criminal
activity, her own unpleasant imaginings had lasted for months following the

first press conference. Her nightmares had also been reignited by the first
exhibition of the earliest artefacts. They’d never really gone away.
Matt grinned. ‘I guessed as much.’
‘What?’
‘You know what I’m talking about. You had them too.’
‘I had a natural reaction to some very upsetting revelations and to the
physical evidence found in those caves. I’d say that was a healthy
response.’
‘Or for someone on the edge emotionally and up here.’ Matt tapped his
head. ‘Even if you only brushed against what had been in that ground for so
long.’
‘And you’re saying that because you found the cave it’s been worse for
you?’
‘Not just found it but reached inside and took a few things out. I admit
it, I kept a few things here, for a while.’
‘More than enough has been discovered in that cave. No one will worry
about you taking a few souvenirs.’
‘It’s not them I worry about, the museums and universities, or the Land
Trust. It’s others . . . who’ve been touched by that place more than most.’
‘Who?’
Matt smiled grimly and shook his head. ‘Let me put it another way.
Don’t you think it’s strange that two of the archaeologists topped
themselves? They’d been inside those cliffs for over a year. No past history
to account for suicide. They went downhill inside that place, in the caves.
The head of the project even quit. They say he’s a mental case, a wreck.’
‘There were other contributing factors. Stress, his relationship fell apart
–’
‘Sure, I’ve heard the official line too. They always stay on message. But
he wasn’t the only one who lost the plot down there. None of those working
at the start are there any more.’
Katrine shrugged. ‘I’m not privy to the staffing arrangements. But I
assume that lots of universities are involved and a great many people are
queuing up to work there.’
‘I wonder how long they’ll stick around. Not long, so I’ve heard. Think
about it.’
‘People might come and go for all kinds of reasons.’

‘True, but I know it’s because of their dreams. And let’s call it the
atmosphere that they’ve breathed in. Sounds raving mad, doesn’t it?’
It did, though within Katrine’s mind the heavy curvature of the clay
Venus figure rotated again through a dim background of darkness and
blood; a mere memory, a fragment from her own unhealthy thoughts.
‘It’s not just the archaeologists and me. I’ve got a mate who works in
two old people’s homes round here. Dementia, end of life care, that sort of
thing. And he says he’s never seen anything like it. The way they’re all
behaving in there, yeah. Elderly people who can’t look after themselves.
He’s no liar. But it’s in their heads now too. It’s why I got rid, took it all
back. The pieces I had. The statue, the skull-cup, the little pipe, all of it.
Chucked it all away, into the sea. I know what you’re thinking but I’m not
superstitious, not religious. What I experienced was unnatural. And what I
saw from the sky, two weeks after I found that cave, wasn’t right either. But
it was all part of the same thing.’
‘Same thing?’
‘As what’s in my dreams. It’s connected.’
Half of her didn’t want to hear any more. The other half, the half she had
no control over, asked, ‘What did you see from the air?’

8
‘Sorry, what did you say?’ Kat hadn’t caught Steve’s request.
He reappeared in the mouth of her tiny kitchen, the jazz on the kitchen
stereo muffling behind his bulk. ‘Baked, mashed or chips?’
‘Oh, anything.’
He rolled his eyes.
‘Er, baked.’
Steve returned to the stove. A percussion of rattling utensil drawers
followed.
The troubled and wizened figure of Matt Hull had lingered vividly in
Kat’s thoughts. Steve’s arrival hadn’t banished the spectre of that frail
figure with unkempt hair, standing in the doorway of his small grey home,
anxiously peering about the street. In the rear-view mirror she’d watched
his front door close, sealing him off from the village once more: where he’d
lived all of his life but now resided as if hunted. A grown man made
unstable by acute fear.
Often hard to follow, most of what he’d confided of his ideas, dreams or
whatever inspired his jumbled mixture of fantasy, conspiracy and paranoia
had been disturbing. Before Kat left she’d advised him to see a doctor but
known he wouldn’t.
His sincerity regarding the threats made against him she didn’t doubt.
Genuine terror was hard to fake and that’s what she’d seen in his eyes. He’d
refrained from disclosing a single identity too, yet from what she could
gather he was claiming he’d been victimised by a group of local people for
years. He’d complied with their requests, eschewed paragliding and kept his
feet on the ground.
The idea of him being bullied upset her more than what he’d recounted
about the effect of the caves. At least until Matt Hull intimated he’d
witnessed a double murder.
That she still balked at: the rambling about bad dreams, an influence
seeping from the caves she could weather, but murder? A fantasy, surely.

Of what lay between Divilmouth and Brickburgh she knew little.
Excluding the excavation of the cave, the area had produced nothing
newsworthy during her time in Devon. She couldn’t even recall a minor
crime, let alone what Matt Hull wanted her to believe. Her professional
assignments involved the higher-profile tourist destinations of South Hams,
Dartmoor and parts of North Devon: the affluent, picturesque bits. Which is
why she’d come home after the interview surprised that Sheila had never
commissioned a feature on Redhill’s astounding regeneration.
They were never here before they opened the cave. The red people.
Another new addition to Brickburgh and Redhill and news to her, what
Matt Hull had called ‘the red people’. They’d formed the ultimate focus of
his chaotic narrative.
His first sighting of these strange characters was the most bizarre story
that Kat had yet heard in her career as a journalist. A story that had stuttered
from the mouth of the same man who’d also admitted to being consumed
with psychotic thoughts directed towards anyone he perceived as a threat.
Not something he’d ever experienced before, or so he’d claimed. ‘I see red
too. I do. For hours some days. I’ve broken two teeth from grinding.’ At
that point Kat had nearly grabbed her coat and run from his home.
Rage was a natural response to victimisation. It was also a symptom of
depression, though she’d been truly baffled by his story about ‘red people’
attacking a campsite. She hadn’t asked if she could record the interview but
had surreptitiously set her phone to record when his story took an especially
sinister turn.
The second bedroom of the cottage she used as an office and just before
dinner she replayed the recording in there.
‘This swarm of them red people came down the hill at Slagcombe.
Taking their time. They just walked towards each other and surrounded this
couple at the bottom. And that valley became a pit with two animals
trapped inside it.
‘I stayed in the air, because I didn’t like the look of how things were
going on the ground.
‘One of the campers was by the tent, the woman. The other was on the
beach, her fella, I think. She was running this way and that but gave up and
went back to the tent. I don’t know why. I was shouting, get in the water,
get in the water, but she’d never have heard me. And this whole time, her

fella was running up from the shore to get back to her. But it was too late.
They were surrounded.
‘The red ones came into the valley naked but painted like they were
from another place. Like they were from the past. I remember looking for
cameras and thinking, Is this a film? But there was none of that, no cameras
or the lights they use. This was real. It was happening. And these two
people, the campers, didn’t know what to do . . . The ring of red people just
got tighter.
‘In the end, the woman gave up. Was resigned, like. I’ll never forget it. I
heard her voice before that. Faint. She was shouting something. I don’t
know what.
‘But the bloke was done first. He stopped running and they got round
him. He went into the reeds. I saw his arms in the air as they got close,
crowding him. That’s when I realised they had something in their hands.
Small black things, these objects. Like rocks.
‘And it kicked off. He tried to break through them and they were
hanging on to him, like a pack of animals. But when they got hold of that
woman I’d seen enough. I flew north. Back to where me gear was, near
Whaleham where I launched. My phone was there and I was going to call
the law. But those red bastards were already waiting, you see, waiting for
me. Three of them had got there first and were staring into the sky, right at
me. Just all standing beside my gear. A woman, two men. They’d have done
me too, like the campers.
‘So I carried on, further up the coast, and I came down hard on Saviour
Bay. Nearly came a cropper too and took a dip in the water because I was so
rattled by what I’d seen. But I got untangled and put everything away and
hiked back home.
‘And that’s when I had the first visit. You see, they were waiting for me
to get here. They already knew who I was. But these others, inside here,
weren’t red. They . . .’
He’d broken off then so as not to reveal the identities of who had been
waiting for him at his home.
‘They were sitting in my chairs. They’d broken in. And I was told, in no
uncertain terms, that I was not to fly again and that the air belonged to them
from now on. They knew all about my boy too and I lost it when they said
his name. But what they did to me . . . what they showed me left me with no
choice. I hadn’t a chance against them. There was no fighting back and

there was no leaving here. They made that clear. They told me I couldn’t
go. They wanted me where they could keep an eye on me. And so I could
do a few favours for them.’
Kat remembered Matt Hull pausing again at that point to rub his face.
He’d wiped tears from his eye sockets. ‘The red ones came that night too.
To make sure I knew how much shit I was in because of what I’d seen in
that valley with the campers. The first one I saw was in the garden. She was
just standing there staring at the windows. I went out with the torch to see
who’d set the neighbour’s dog off and there she was. Naked, all red and
shining like her skin was peeled off. All her hair was pulled out too, from
her head. And twisted round this horrible old face.
‘I went back inside double-quick. But there were more of them and all
looking through the front windows, showing me their red faces . . . their
teeth. The white eyes. Never been able to put that out of my mind. They
weren’t right, their eyes.
‘I’ve never been so freaked out. I shut myself in the bloody bathroom
upstairs. But they left something. The backdoor had handprints on it, red
handprints. A sign. All of this was a warning, like I was marked. That night
was a demonstration of their reach. They could show up anytime unless I
did exactly what they wanted.
‘Couple of days later, my ex-wife mentioned that someone had painted a
red hand on her back door. My lad and his mates swore they weren’t
responsible and she believed them. I did too because I knew who’d done it.
‘I’ve been on the ground and mostly in here ever since, losing my mind.
Work’s gone to shit. I’m unreliable. I know I am. They took my gear with
them. All of it. Clipping my wings, that’s what they said they were doing.
But they’d bring me gear back when they wanted favours doing. They left
this too. It was just sat on my doorstep the next morning.’
Matt had shown her the effigy he’d found on his doorstep: a marker set
in place by the strangers who’d apparently peered through his windows and
stood in his garden, naked and painted red. She’d seen a similar design
before: a crude figure of a woman, about the size of a Barbie doll, carven
from bone, with the head of a snouty dog. Its small skull was made
unnervingly alert and eager, the pair of small ears pricked upright. A thing
with origins in the Brickburgh caverns.
***

‘You might be content, and for the rest of your life, covering the fun runs,
the new musicals down the coast, the Michelin stars, the guide dogs, ponies,
the new llama at the zoo, or whatever the fuck it is that we’re always doing
here, but I can’t take another year of it, Kat.’
The argument with Steve began after dinner within minutes of her
playing her recording of Matt Hull to him, and he’d been quick to make his
accusations too, leaving Kat desperately wishing that she’d never shared the
information with her boyfriend.
But keeping it to herself would have made her unbearably tense and
anxious. She’d only wanted to lighten her load, to get a second opinion
from someone who cared about her, who’d tell her that Matt was unstable,
exaggerating, that everything would be all right and that she’d not need to
break his confidence any further by going to the police, or getting involved
in any inquiries into a local drug gang. Her compulsion to confess to Steve
now made her feel pathetic.
As much as she tried not to dwell on the issue, Steve was much younger
than her and less experienced in just about any way that she could imagine,
save windsurfing and partying. But since they’d met, she’d been the catalyst
for Steve to grow more ambitious professionally than she would ever be
again. And within seconds of sharing Matt’s story they’d been competing,
again. A situation that always made her feel ill.
During a playback of the interview, Steve had been enraptured. Only
after she’d admitted she intended to do nothing about Matt Hull’s claims,
had his response been harsh, the scold burning hours later.
Admittedly, Steve had been tipsy, having moved from beer to wine from
the afternoon to the evening and although he rarely spoke to her in that
tone, his dissatisfaction with what he was doing with his life had clearly
been festering more toxically than she’d hitherto intuited.
She’d secured all of Steve’s freelance work at Life and Style, as well as
work for several digital marketing companies. But of late, he’d increasingly
had the gall to make her feel like an impediment holding him back
professionally.
Kat had long taken therapeutic measures to prohibit her own history’s
intrusion into the present. But they didn’t always work. The past was a
greater part of the present than the present itself seemed to be. And that
evening her head had filled with the pretty face of a girl called Clarabelle.

At a magazine Kat had worked for in London, she’d employed
Clarabelle as an intern: a young woman from a privileged background
who’d wasted no time in undermining Kat in editorial meetings. And she’d
been surreptitiously encouraged to do so by Kat’s rivals. Kat had lost the
job eighteen months later when another round of cuts had kicked in: it was,
in fact, her final staff position in magazine editorial. The redundancy had
occurred at the same time as Kat’s twelve-year relationship with her fiancé,
Graham, fell apart.
The fallout from Graham she was still dealing with and Steve had
unpicked the stitches. That evening in her cottage he’d exuded Clarabelle’s
sense of entitlement to the best professional work and an assumption of all
that came with it.
Steve came from money and like the intern it was as if he found it
preposterous that someone from the lower social orders, like Kat, should
hold a position senior to them. There must have been some mistake. You’re
not one of us.
That’s how Kat read both situations and her personal experience
wouldn’t allow an alternative interpretation.
She and Steve had been together, on and off with non-committed
periods, for over three years. But what was the relationship built on? That
was the question she asked herself again. What you can do for him. That’s
what this is about.
Within moments of Steve's outburst, their age differences and the
disapproval Kat harboured about his co-dependency upon his parents also
reared scaly heads. His criticism of her an inevitable tripwire.
She’d always found Steve’s terror of his mother hard to respect, though
she managed to suppress judgement. He was thirty-two but Mum and Dad
were still bankrolling him. They owned the flat he lived in rent-free. They
wanted grandchildren too. A desire for multiple heirs, the enhanced social
standing: it still concerned the affluent as much as it had ever done. And she
was unable to give Steve children. So how was this going to work?
Her internal cacophony had included her certainty that Steve’s mother
disapproved of her being ten years his senior. His parents were present in all
of their arguments, at least in spirit: an unfailingly polite couple who’d
never really warmed to Kat, who were potentially of the unspoken but
implied opinion that she wasn’t good enough for their son. And once the

disapproving spectres of Delia and Reg appeared in her mind, her repressed
anger unsuppressed itself. The argument with Steve had escalated fast.
When Steve had said, ‘I’ll go to Sheila myself,’ Kat had genuinely
loathed him for several minutes that had made her skin go cold.
‘She doesn’t want to know, Steve! I nearly had to revive her with
smelling salts when she saw a picture of a gnawed bone that was twelve
thousand years old!’
‘The Gazette in Torbay. Plenty will be interested in this.’
‘It’s privileged information from my source, not yours. I only told you
because it upset me and because I needed to share it with someone. I
wanted your support. Support from someone who keeps telling me that he’s
in love with me. Makes me wonder what the fuck this is all about. Am I
useful to you, is that it? A stepping stone?’
‘That’s low!’
‘This is not material for you! You’re not even a journalist!’
When Steve had hit thirty he’d become tired of ‘bumming around’ and
‘doing his own thing’, as he’d initially pitched it to her. Nigh on a decade of
windsurfing, raving and the creation of a Dad-funded app that never worked
had given him a premature midlife crisis. Meeting Kat had incrementally
worsened his frustration.
Despite her world-weary air – and her consistent efforts to detox her
former lifestyle from her system with diets, yoga, meditation and anything
that helped her cope with the post-traumatic stress disorder that she’d been
diagnosed with seven years before – by the time she was Steve’s age she’d
already been working in the capital’s top-flight media for nine years. Her
CV bothered Steve. His resentment had acidified.
‘It’s just not right to keep this quiet,’ he’d insisted that evening.
Preposterous too, his lecturing her like that. It had been worse than his
pretence that he gave a damn about Matt Hull.
She’d exploded. ‘You’re going to lecture me about press ethics? From
your considerable experience as a press photographer? Not even one year’s
freelance work under your belt. Work that I bloody secured for you! You do
realise that Sheila has far better people available?’
‘My pictures are good!’
‘For a fish restaurant in Plymouth, so don’t get ahead of yourself. I am
not an investigative reporter. I never wanted to be.’

‘So you’re just going to let them get away with it? With what they did to
that poor bloke?’
‘He’s unstable. Probably delusional. If I had a name or a shred of
evidence besides some crazy stories about red people attacking a campsite
that he saw from a thousand feet up, I’d contact the police. But all I have is
a garbled story of the Brickburgh curse from a man who needs psychiatric
help.’
At that, Steve had smirked triumphantly and she’d really wanted to slap
his face. ‘Oh, he’s not alone,’ he’d carped. ‘There are others. I’ve heard all
kinds of things about that area. It’s notorious. You wouldn’t know that.
You’re not from here.’
At that attempt to exclude her, he’d quickly looked sheepish,
embarrassed and out of his depth.
He’d left soon after, unable to withstand the cast of Kat’s trembling face.
***
Unable to sleep after the row, Kat dug around online.
She vowed that whatever she found would not be shared with Steve. His
enthusiasm for ‘checking it all out’ needed little encouragement and she
wouldn’t risk his appropriation of the story because he was bored and
desperate.
A competing guilty suspicion that her courage had failed, that Steve was
morally right and that she should help Matt Hull by going to the police was
exacerbated by the results of her online search into missing persons, in or
near Brickburgh and Divilmouth.
On the Torbay Gazette’s website she quickly located two stories relevant
to her search as well as old appeals for information. The same information
was repeated at two further newspaper websites in Plymouth and another in
Exeter.
The incidents were five years old and must have occurred around the
time Matt Hull discovered the cliff fissure. Matt had said the camping
incident had occurred at the beginning of spring. While aloft that final time
he’d seen wheatears, a red kite and meadow pipits over the coastline. A
flock of Brent geese had been flying in the opposite direction on their long
journey to Siberia.

At the same time, a pair of campers who were believed to have been
camping near Brickburgh had instead performed a curious double suicide in
North Cornwall, not long after being reported missing. Shortly before their
demise, a walker had vanished from the coast path near Brickburgh.
Curiously, articles of the missing couple’s clothing had been found in a
remote Cornish cove, folded into two piles and left together besides other
personal effects. Though alerts had been posted as far away as Dorset due to
the sea’s currents, their bodies were never recovered.
Their yellow Volkswagen Transporter had also been found near their
clothes, their camping equipment packed inside, some twenty miles from
where they’d been staying in Divilmouth. There was no motive for the
double suicide or why Cornwall had been chosen. The case had mystified
their families.
But they’d last been seen in Divilmouth. They’d even told a guest at the
hotel where they were staying that they’d intended to hike and camp near
Brickburgh. Cornwall had never been mentioned by either of them. But as
their vehicle and effects were found in Cornwall, the search had moved
twenty miles down the coast and the official focus, while it lasted, appeared
to have remained there.
Had she not heard Matt Hull’s story that afternoon nothing about the
incident would have inspired her curiosity. But two campers going missing
at the same time he flew over Brickburgh who’d never been found? She
thought that odd.
By the time Kat was scrolling through page seven of a Google search
she found the second missing person case from the same area. Earlier in the
year the campers vanished, a walker called Andy Little had also been
reported missing near Brickburgh.
It was believed that he’d been overcome by darkness and fallen from the
cliffs, misjudging a walk on difficult terrain. His body had never been found
either. No suspicious circumstances were reported and his rucksack had
washed up in the next county on Chesil Beach.
An accident by all accounts. They often happened near the sea and cliffs.
But when the Andy Little incident was considered in relation to the missing
campers, whose intentions had been to hike to the same place as the walker
and around the very time that Matt Hull claimed to have witnessed ‘red
people’ attacking a campsite, Kat did wonder.

Old news, five years distant, and it wasn’t impossible to assume that
Matt Hull had read about the campers’ disappearance and concocted a story.
But when she recalled the torment in his eyes and his twitching limbs, her
instincts insinuated that he might have seen something on that beach, not far
from where he lived in Redhill.
***
The following morning, before she left home to gather material for an L&S
feature on a sculptor in Dartington, Kat called a contact stationed with the
police at Brickburgh.
Rick worked in community liaison. He was the press officer for the
emergency services covering the area and might ask around for her. She
knew him via the news desk of the magazine: in effect, a communal phone
in the magazine’s tiny office.
Kat lied to Rick and claimed she was undertaking consultancy work for
a property developer and prospecting a potential cottage renovation near
Redhill. She asked him about illegal activity near the village, adding an
emphasis on the drug rumours she was picking up. She said she was being
lazy on due diligence and would rather talk to the law than wade through
the council archives.
Rick happily told her that three years before she’d arrived in Devon, a
large cannabis factory had been found and closed down at a Brickburgh
farm, about seven miles from the cave, resulting in four arrests.
Rick also admitted that ‘everyone’ knew the crop was still being grown
surreptitiously in pockets, here and there, but little was sold locally. Unless
anyone was hurt or tougher criminal elements were drawn to the area, they
had little chance of finding the operations.
‘That area is massive,’ he’d said. ‘Better the devil you know, between
us, when there’s no violence and us being so short-handed from the cuts.’
Matt Hull had alluded to organised criminal behaviour, though not
specified a line of business. But he’d said the perpetrators were ‘ruthless’.
Didn’t drugs inspire ruthless behaviour throughout their supply chains?
Besides a plethora of minor drug busts in Torbay, Plymouth and Exeter –
local operations selling narcotics received through the harbours and
rumbled through occasional police operations – the only other headlinegrabbing drug-related incident that Kat uncovered online occurred in the

early Eighties. This story appeared at the end of her search, some twenty
pages deep. A story that interested Kat for a reason unconnected to Matt
Hull.
Oddly, the story was not carried by any local press sites, probably
because it predated the internet. Instead it was posted on Wikipedia, as well
as several other websites concerned with folk and folk rock music.
‘Brickburgh’, ‘Redhill’ and ‘drugs’ had been the keywords that had
dredged the information from the depths of the online cosmos.
Although she’d lived in South Devon for seven years she’d not known
that a folk rock singer, Tony Willows, owned a farm at Redstone Cross,
near the Brickburgh dig. His band, Witchfinder Apprentice, had been a cult
band in the Seventies. She’d heard of them and remained vaguely aware of
one eerie song, ‘Old Black Mag’, that her ex, Graham, had often played in
their flat in Westbourne Grove. She’d never taken much interest in
Graham’s music collection but recalled him regarding Witchfinder
Apprentice as the Black Sabbath of British folk rock.
A quick check of their Wikipedia page confirmed they’d charted at
number two with a song, ‘All Around My Throne’, at Christmas in 1974.
Another tune that Graham had often played at weekends.
At the edge of Tony Willows’s farm in 1979, the dead body of a young
woman had been discovered the day after the solstice, her system full of
cocaine, LSD and alcohol. Apparently, the girl had been a guest at one of
the raucous, seasonal private parties that Willows had thrown for his old
entourage. The woman had also suffered head trauma from a fall. Willows
briefly went to prison for manslaughter and possession. After his release he
was never seen in public again.
The excess of the singer’s lifestyle was also documented at length on the
band’s Wikipedia page. Kat skim-read it, learning that he’d suffered a
massive breakdown in 1977, either brought on, or worsened, by long-term
LSD and tranquilliser use. He’d left the band and released one eclectic solo
album of folk music on his own label. The record had surfaced in 1986 but
he never appeared on a stage after 1977.
Elsewhere online, his biography petered out with his current status as a
breeder of rare ponies and Black Welsh Mountain sheep at Redstone Cross
Farm.
When Kat searched for the farm, Google maps placed it three miles
above the Brickburgh caves.

She quelled her own instinct for conspiracy and random but easily made
connections. Famous entertainers hiding in South Hams and Cornwall were
not uncommon. She knew of at least three from the same period as
Willows’s heyday in British rock music.
As so often happened with an online search, she found herself being
dragged into an annexe unrelated to what she’d first attempted to research.
But what surprised her most about the Willows information was that no one
at the magazine had ever mentioned him, which was odd considering Life
and Style’s obsession with local success, affluence and celebrity. Kat made
a note to ask Sheila about Tony Willows the next time she called the L&S
office.
By the evening, her interest had drifted away from missing campers and
Matt Hull; her priority became a persistent desire to mend the recent
fracture with Steve. They needed to produce a feature article together on the
new Brickburgh dig exhibition in Exeter and the last thing she wanted was
an atmosphere, with him sullen and monosyllabic, as she directed him
around the displays, telling him what to photograph.
Before she lay down, Kat sent him a text: We need to talk about Exeter.
Tomorrow. K x

9
The great expanse of time elapsing between the exhibition and the distant
inhabitation of the caves was not as apparent as Helene thought it should
be. The condition of the recently recovered artefacts was remarkable. What
she saw was also unpleasant.
The Home of a Lost People: 60,000 Years BC. The relics on display had
been recovered from the deepest level of the Brickburgh caves so far, the
most important Neanderthal site ever found in Britain. An extinct people
occupying the Brickburgh caves, periodically, across another fifteen
thousand years.
Helene paused to glance at maps, illustrations, read some information
boards. She’d liked to have watched the films but there was always one
child or another drawn to the glowing screens and pushing buttons.
The bout coupé hand-axe had been the first artefact identifying the
remains in the cave as Neanderthal. U-shaped in silhouette, the tool had a
convex blade, a surface curved like a sphere, its bluish-black flint glinting
under electric light.
A sign explained its purpose: ‘Butchery: decapitation, dismemberment,
defleshing carcasses.’ A stone knapped and flaked to hack and carve flesh.
Merely by looking at the blades Helene could effortlessly imagine the
damage the tools could inflict. And beneath the forbidding and starkly
beautiful landscape that had swallowed and rejected her while she’d looked
for vestiges of her brother’s final path, these very tools had once been
slippery with a great volume of blood.
The foaming mouths of the dogs at Redstone Cross, her being so tired on
the windswept hills, the bestial noises her brother had recorded, must also
have conspired to form the unpleasant collusions inside her sleeping mind
the night before. She’d first woken at four with a start, suffering the terror
of finding herself inside an unfamiliar room, separated from her daughter.
Unable to recall specific details of her dream – most of it obscured by a
dark-red smear suggesting a frenzy of activity – she’d woken unrested that
morning, suffering something akin to a hangover. But the exhibition both

revived and worsened the lingering sense of having witnessed something
terrible in her sleep.
Detailed copies of the cave paintings were reproduced on large
photographic boards, installed in connecting stairwells. Helene suspected it
was these images she’d dreamed of, though in sleep the figures on the red
walls had been moving. A constant, hypnotic sound of wind, piped through
the claustrophobic confines of a wet tunnel, had formed a soundtrack.
A 3D graphic beside the axes caught her eye. The illustration depicted a
group of thickset figures, hoary of face and made bulky by their animal-skin
coverings. In the long grass where a vast creature had fallen, exhausted
from many wounds, the men stripped the elephantine beast of its flesh,
exposing the sturdy scaffolding of its bones. A thicket of black spear shafts
and the animal’s tusks thrust through misty air. Vultures circled and alighted
to feast. A wounded hunter lay on his side, clutching ribs and a limp arm,
his face grey. Hard times.
A thousand tons of sediment had been mined and sifted from atop the
exhibited remains. A great layer of earth installed by natural soil
movements, floodwater and glacial activity, separating this group of early
humans from those that came after them, fifteen thousand years later at
around 45,000 BC. The latter remains were found in another section of the
cave system and were displayed on level 1. She’d get to them next.
But while the Neanderthals resided in the Brickburgh Caves, it appeared
that other things had occurred in those black recesses of the earth: terrible
things, happening for reasons unclear to the experts.
Hunger in the extreme weather had probably played its part: the
perpetual drops in temperature, the stalling of the Gulf Stream, the frozen
tundras pushed forward by the Northern ice sheets. And with some help
from the illustrations, Helene had no difficulty imagining hunters returning
home, gaunt and empty-handed, the vulnerable drawing deeper inside the
cave and about the fire as the hungry dogs of an eternal winter howled
outside and inside a cold labyrinth of moist burrows.
The final chapter in the Neanderthal display, the one that had drawn so
many excited schoolchildren to itself, shaded Helene’s thoughts even darker
than they’d been at first light. These were artefacts to make any mother
want to hold her child tight.
Fragments of a human skull obliterated by a large stone littered the faux
rock floor of the display case. The scattering of shards resembled stone

chippings but the pieces had once formed a child’s head. A boy’s skull
reduced to a vase dropped upon a hard floor.
Beneath the incomplete skull a collapsed human skeleton was splayed.
Like splinters of ancient pottery each component of the skeletal structure
was set in a ruddy coloured stone: a rectangular plinth cut from a section of
the cave floor and removed in its entirety. The final resting place of a young
Neanderthal male, malnourished at the time of death.
Stanzas of unintended horror poetry on white display cards indicated
that seven children and three young adults had been found upon a slope
inside the Neanderthal cave, their pitiful forms concealed by debris. Now
installed inside a cabinet, three tiny infant skulls grimaced their little faces
at the light of the future, where their unspeakable story was interpreted.
Large eye sockets and small jaws offered determined expressions. Initially,
archaeologists assumed the group of youngsters had been crushed by a
cave-in. A forensic examination of the bones revealed a different fate: each
of the individuals had been manually disarticulated. Many of their bones
were then smashed apart and gnawed by other Neanderthal teeth, perhaps
by their fellows, even family members.
Their demise had been established through the indicative Neanderthal
dental condition, ‘taurodontism’, that produced stronger teeth, more
exposed from the gums. On receipt of that information, Helene had shut her
eyes to dispel an image of yellow teeth clamped on a small bone . . . apelike
mouths sucking.
Origins. How it began.
Helene moved away, before her imagination coated the little skulls with
other features and expressions. She stopped by photographs of rock piles.
Only they weren’t stones but pictures of hyena droppings. Petrified mounds
rich in both animal and human bone deposits. A hyena den had existed
close to the Neanderthals, a pit inside an adjoining branch of the cave
system. A section filled by the earth’s movements but a chamber once
accessed through a crevice on the surface.
The card accompanying the photographs postulated that prey was
‘dragged through the fissure and devoured below’. Teeth marks on the
pelvis and skull of a mammoth suggested a new species of hyena had
existed, as large as those previously thought extinct.
Neanderthal teeth and bones discarded as indigestible were also
discovered inside the petrified droppings of the jackals occupying the pit.

Following herds of mammoth, Neanderthal hunters, wolves and hyenas had
loped from the plains of northwestern Europe, crossing Doggerland.
Some distance from the bone larders of the children, devoured by their
own, another six Neanderthal bodies had been found. These were buried in
a different manner, side by side.
At the time of their death, these people had been old. Their skulls were
intact and each revealed the characteristic Neanderthal bulge at the rear, the
‘occipital bun’. Palaeoanthropologist artists had fashioned a resemblance of
one of the inhabitants on a mounted bust.
Level with Helene’s eyes, the face leered directly out of prehistory, its
wrinkled flesh the colour of tea and as riven by deep lines as an eighty-yearold woman of Helene’s time, one who had spent a life working outdoors
without sun-cream.
Tufty white hair sprouted from the elongated head. The murky brown
eyes displayed a clear, hard, human intelligence. A bulbous nose flared into
black nostril pits and Helene recalled the weathered vagrant she’d once seen
in London’s Soho, who’d worn a Union Jack flag like an emperor’s cape.
Unlike the children’s remains, the mature individuals had been interned
with reverence and care: ‘Elders’ prized after they’d died in their fourth
decade. Perhaps they’d been laid to rest when food had not been so scarce.
No animals had worried their remains and they’d stayed undisturbed in the
very places in which they’d first been laid out in the caves, some time
between 55,000 and 50,000 BC.
Conditions in the sealed limestone cave had preserved their bones: even
signs of arthritis and tooth decay had been revealed in analysis. That they’d
been cared for in their dotage, even loved, offered some much-needed
evidence of humanity within such an abattoir..
Inside the shallow trenches of their graves, a ruddy stain, an iron oxide
dye, had also been detected by chemists. Across generations of Neanderthal
occupation, the remains of the ‘special dead’ had been painted before
interment. And each rust-stained figure had ventured into eternity with a
cruel black hand-axe within reach of its skeletal hand.

10
It’s the faces I keep seeing. Red faces. Every time I fall asleep. They come in
and out of a dark place. There’s smoke. Red light on the walls. The wind
too, always the wind.
But they’re not all the same, the things in that black place. There’s
something much bigger than the red people. It has a dark face . . . And
there’s these white things, like big rats . . . They all walk like them little
dogs you see in a circus, on their back legs, but they’re bigger than bears.
Devils. It’s like I’m dreaming of devils.
It’s the noise of the young ones I can’t stand, the babies, the kids. And
when the dogs, these devils, start whining and the babies start screaming, I
wake up. I wake up and I’m crying.
On seeing the reproduced cave paintings at the exhibition, the dreams that
Matt Hull had narrated to Kat found further synchronicity with her position
on mankind’s perpetually harsh, savage and troubled past. To her, history
itself was an epitome of darkness and it seemed humanity’s very origins had
been made epochal by their ghastliness.
Even simple articles of clothing stored behind glass in museums
suggested the grotesque and death to her. From end to end, history was
collected horror, preserved for the fascination of a bestial species. Her
experience of museums had never been sufficiently different from her
experience of funerals. And the most recent fragments exhumed from
Brickburgh’s famous caves, curiously sharpened a sense of her own time,
while reducing her sense of security within it.
The artefacts were stored behind glass so highly polished that Kat felt
she might step inside the larger exhibits. Then and now seemed uncannily
closer. Too close.
Clean bathrooms and a chic café awaited downstairs. Traffic rumbled
and swished past the museum’s red bricks. Here were ordinary people
wearing contemporary clothes. A boisterous school party wandered past her
before dispersing to mill elsewhere. And yet, despite the modern screens, a

sense of the cave’s raw primitive presence, this brutal time on exhibition,
had truly been evoked as a morbid and most vivid spectacle, its atmosphere
intensifying within the artificial space.
Kat found herself looking at the ceiling and windows to break a
trancelike fatigue as if she’d been forced to look at the evidence of war
crimes. The presence of other people and Steve with his camera offered
some comfort. She wouldn’t have walked here alone.
Conscious of their solemn, hesitant progress, Steve said, ‘Like a crypt,
isn’t it?’ At least their heads, for once, were inhabiting the same space.
By design, the first level of the gallery space resembled the largest
cavern discovered in the Brickburgh cave system: the ‘Grand Chamber’.
Between the installations, the walls and ceilings were decorated with the
same ochre and charcoal colours of the caves. Dark-blooded and womblike
was the atmosphere and made doubly oppressive with shadow to replicate
the enclosed stone environment.
The slit Matt Hull had reached through to grab a few souvenirs years
before had subsequently revealed itself to be the equivalent of a small rear
window, opening onto a large subterranean burrow divided into separate
chambers. All of the caves had been used intermittently by various
subspecies of humans across tens of thousands of years.
And this was a big deal. The cultural significance alone of what had
been displayed, the manufactured relics left behind by ancient societies, had
shattered much of what was known of early man. Existing knowledge about
the first colonisations of Britain was currently under root-and-branch
review. Kat had been given the opportunity to write the L&S feature, an
assignment coveted by the magazine’s freelancers. Kat told herself she was
lucky.
About her head, a herd of horses fled across the walls, their swift
passage defined by long, sensual curves, shaped from thick sweeps of
charcoal. These were the first things her eyes had been drawn to:
reproductions of the cave’s art. Discreet speakers even transmitted a
reproduction of animal shrieks and of a galloping rout across the ancient
turf of Devon.
Expressions of terror were still frozen upon the horses’ red muzzles
because of the great dogs that bounded behind them.
The hunched, black-muzzled creature that led the pack’s hunt was of an
unnatural size, the centrepiece. Unto it the ancient artist had drawn the eyes

of his audience. Seemingly, the dog-thing had risen upon its hind legs, or
had been depicted leaping for the last horse. It was hard to tell.
The eyes above the creature’s wrinkled muzzle were crazed, maliciously
eager, idiotically sadistic. The face had been chipped into the rock and
impacted with red dye, over and over for millennia, and with so much care
by successive generations of occupant. The ‘therianthrope’, as it had been
called, had confounded the dig’s archaeologists.
Bizarre chimeras. Three of the savage amalgamations of human and
animal had been found depicted on the walls. Much patient digging and
sifting across four years had led to a revelation of their ghastly forms.
Inside this dark place, within the humid air, so fraught with the sounds
of animal distress, Kat was unwilling to look at them for long. To her, the
jackal-headed things functioned as a sudden, startling distillation of the
natural order’s horror: the eternal repetition of bloodshed occurring the
world over.
Those curating the exhibition proposed that the three hound-headed
human figures – one was large and jet-black, the other two smaller and
sickeningly pale – might have been gods or some curious supernormal
forms into which shamans believed they could transform themselves. Only
vestiges of Stone Age and Aboriginal belief systems offered any clues as to
what these curious figures represented.
Kat cribbed notes: Were these people suggesting they could access a
spiritual world? Was this a religion that far pre-dated the Bible?
As she scribbled, her focus was broken by images of Matt Hull’s
haggard face and of what he’d so recently recounted to her.
The people’s faces are red. Always. But the red faces are filled with fear.
Lined, scarred, dirty, painted faces, terrified. And they’re beating things,
rocks with sticks, all of them together. They’re talking or singing something.
It’s all high-pitched and weird in this wind. A wind that’s in the darkness
with them. The wind comes out of the earth with the dogs, the devils. I can
always hear them. The devils. Coming up.
Kat refocused on her notes and on directing Steve’s photographs. She
needed the information boards captured for reference. Steve didn’t notice
her preoccupation, nor did he seem aware of her distress. He only saw what
was before his camera lens.
When they reached the 3D model of an elder’s head, he whispered,
‘Ugly bastard,’ from the side of his mouth. ‘I get a bit of Shrek. What do

you think?’
Kat found the crinkled face profoundly unappealing. Several of its
brown teeth were missing from the dark gums. Set amidst wild white hair,
its bloodshot eyes leered from out of a face powdered the red of paprika.
The flesh might have been flecked with dried blood and was far worse than
the Neanderthal head upstairs. This one’s features were flatter and broader.
Red people.
Matt’s rambling narrative remained prescient. Kat wondered if the man’s
sinister fantasies had only worsened after persecution at the hands of local
criminals, who’d suspected he’d witnessed their drug operations from the
air. Maybe the intimidation he’d suffered had mixed itself up with these
artefacts. He lived near the site. Due to the size and expense of the
operation, local volunteers had been involved from the start, to delicately
remove thousands of tons of earth from the cave. They’d have seen the cave
paintings and buried elders and been told that they were once painted red.
Redhill’s small population must have chattered about what had been dug
up. Matt would have heard things. Suggestion.
Kat rediscovered the thread of her notes.
The original entrance of the hyenas’ ‘dog chamber’ had been reopened
as part of the ongoing excavation of the Grand Chamber. It had led the dig
team to the lower Neanderthal level. Impossible to imagine, but the later
human species and the Neanderthals before them had shared the caves with
hyenas. In each era of human occupation this natural abattoir had been
filled with large hyenas. They had been the size of African lions and should
have been long extinct.
Inside the ‘dog pit’, as well as the bones of horse, woolly rhino, bison
and Irish Elk (prey hunted down and dragged through a crack in the earth),
and much like the older Neanderthal remains, the chewed bones of later
human occupants had been discovered. In abundance.
Tests proved that many of the human remains had been broken and
gnawed by hyena teeth in the terrible darkness of the earth. Bodies torn
apart before their bones were cracked open for their rich marrow.
Nor was this the last of the macabre connections between the
Neanderthals and what was found at the first level, dated at 12,000 BC: at
the press conference in Plymouth, and in the first exhibition, it was revealed
that the humans had also eaten each other in the same way that their canine

superiors had eaten them. In these caves, in all three periods of occupation,
it was as if people had been tutored by the greater predator.
And I can hear wind. The people are in that cave, close to a fire. It’s all
red and black with shadows spiking across the ceiling . . . their faces are
red and creased and their eyes are white . . . and mad, all rolled up . . .
That’s when I hear them. Coming through the dark. The devils. Am I
seeing hell? That’s what I ask myself when I wake up. Is this hell in my
head?
And the devils always come for that woman who’s crouching in front of
her kids. They’ve come for those dirty kids in the corner who are grabbing
at their mother. She keeps looking for a way out . . . That woman and kids
have been given to the devils by the red people.
They’re like shadows. The devils. Their shadows dim the firelight. It
shrinks. But I can still see them. These things with the long bodies that get
up on two legs. Everywhere, there’s the sounds of devils in the smoke. The
rocks are wet, red and wet.
They laugh like men but growl like dogs. Deep. Horrible. Whining and
whistling and laughing in the wind . . .
They . . . them kids . . . shaking them in its mouth . . .
This is hell. This is hell I keep seeing.
When Matt had told Kat of his nightmares she’d been able to picture
them vividly. She’d had them too. The half-remembered dreams, the ruddy
black smears of places filled with frantic movements and screams. She and
Matt Hull had shared the same dreams.
Children. The cries of children. Matt Hull had only ever been describing
what she’d also experienced; his narrative had only given clarity to what
she’d been suppressing in her own disturbed sleep since the press
conference in Plymouth.
Kat looked for somewhere to sit down. She needed water.
Steve was quick to express his own fatigue with a nearby sixth-form
lecturer, who was holding forth to his blazered students. ‘That teacher could
use a hand-axe in the mouth.’
‘Ssh. Let’s get a drink.’

11
‘You all right?’ A voice beside her.
Helene dabbed her nose and blotted tears with the napkin that had come
with her coffee. Tired legs, a poor night’s sleep, missing her daughter, none
of it was helping. Mostly, she’d just been unsettled by the exhibition and in
a way that she’d never anticipated.
When she’d reached the final section, her thoughts had returned to the
bearded face and scarred eye of the hostile man at the farm the day before.
Him shouting at her, the thin woman watching her retreat, the dog leaping,
its wet teeth, the mad brown eyes streaked red: images impressed into her
memory by fear. The only confrontations she was accustomed to were with
a recalcitrant six-year-old.
Lincoln and his desperate, inexplicable end. The reason she’d come
here: to better understand and to say farewell. He’d killed himself mere
weeks after recording those horrid sounds from a quarry neighbouring the
subject of this very exhibition. A crying child. A relentless trickling of
water. An agitated animal in a lightless space. Her instincts and imagination
made connections she couldn’t rationalise. The displays had also opened a
path into the previous night’s dream, equally ineffable. She couldn’t
remember when she’d felt as mixed-up.
Sipping at her water bottle to create a barrier, she returned her attention
to the concerned face of the young man sat at the next table who’d spoken
to her. A camera hung from his neck on a red and black strap. A plastic
badge on a lanyard read PRESS PASS.
A dark-haired woman with a plump, handsome face sat across the table
from the photographer and eyed Helene with what looked like disapproval
twinned with wariness. Perhaps she was only preoccupied with the book
and papers spread on the table top before her; a woman engaged in a
professional task, no time for distractions, her stiff courtesy a first defence.
Helene had seen the couple inside the Grand Chamber and again on the
stairs between the floors of the exhibition.

The man’s face was slim and attractive, his beard producing the effect of
noble and hipster. He was much younger than the woman, so she doubted
they were together romantically. And yet the woman’s cool demeanour
might yet be born of a perceived threat, an intrusion into her space and onto
her ground. Helene loathed that kind of tension between herself and other
women; she’d made a few jealous in her time.
‘Get to you, did it?’ the man said, his smile kind. ‘It’s why we came
down here. Those children’s skulls were the final straw.’ He winced.
‘Awful.’
Some men could effortlessly offer companionable support, without
seeming intrusive. Helene found him attractive too but made sure not to
show it. She nodded her agreement. ‘I’m a mum,’ she added to placate the
woman, in case they were an item.
‘Must make it worse,' the man said. 'Even though it happened tens of
thousands of years ago, it must still get to you.’
‘You’re not wrong.’ But to change a subject she didn’t want to dwell on,
Helene asked the couple what they were doing at the exhibition.
The man answered, ‘She’s words, I’m pictures.’ He then introduced
himself as Steve and said other things about an assignment for a magazine.
The name of the publication didn’t register. Helene asked if they were local
and they said they were.
‘Mind if we join you?’ Steve asked and Helene raised no objection. But
the woman, who had been introduced as Kat, cast a black look at Steve that
only reached the back of his head.
Once they’d shifted to her table, Helene shared a few tentative details
about Valda. She felt obliged to account for her tears, how the exhibition
had made her needy.
The journalist, Kat, finally softened when Helene offered a few
photographs of Valda she kept in her phone: a jam-smeared face, a small
figure dressed as a fairy with wings, a face split with crazed laughter during
some antic that Helene couldn’t recall.
Steve said he loved kids, and Kat appeared to stiffen for a second at this
admission.
When Helene tactfully moved the conversation away from herself and
asked about their work, she found herself immediately impressed with Kat
and wanted the woman’s resistance to disappear. She wanted to be liked by
her. Not once did the journalist brag about her career; she only mentioned

her work in vague terms. It was Steve who recited Kat’s CV to Helene.
Three of the magazines Kat had worked on in London Helene still read. She
must have read Kat’s work in the past. The journalist offered a thin smile
when Helene stated as much and quickly quelled Helene’s admiration by
suggesting that her career had been ‘of no consequence’.
The couple’s attitude only shifted from polite friendliness when Steve
asked what brought Helene to Devon.
‘He was here? And then he went missing?’ Steve asked Helene, after
she’d nutshelled Lincoln’s story. He and Kat had exchanged glances.
Perhaps the mention of a suicide accounted for their reaction.
‘Two weeks before he passed.’
‘Sorry, I don’t mean to pry,’ Steve said.
‘Then why are you?’ Kat asked him.
Steve looked chastened but was clearly irritated by Kat’s terse remark.
‘It’s all right,’ Helene said. ‘It happened a long time ago. But it’s weird,
I think I’m only coming to terms with it now. It’s another reason why I was
upset.’
‘Grief affects people in different ways,’ Steve offered and Kat looked at
him again as if to question the experience behind such an observation.
As if he were present, a startling sense of Lincoln warmed through
Helene. It had happened the day before. ‘My brother was quite a character.
It was typical of him to spend a whole summer here, camping and recording
underground noises for an obscure website.’
At further prompting from Steve, she described the recordings and
confessed how uncanny she found their connection to the sound effects
piped into the exhibition. She’d never see Kat and Steve again so it didn’t
matter if they thought her a weirdo.
‘The soundtrack here was probably recorded in a zoo, or taken from a
music library with a safari section,’ Steve offered. But he appeared unable
to contain his excitement when Helene mentioned where Lincoln had
camped, though she wasn’t sure why.
She also feared she was out of touch with what was interesting to people
like Steve and Kat. This made her wonder how switched on her brother had
been and how clueless she was about what was ‘cool’: she’d always
believed the opposite to be true.
Kat only frowned as Helene narrated her story and she sensed discontent
in the journalist, even a store of unhappiness. She thought Kat was

glamorous but careless with her appearance, offering an impression of not
really caring about what she’d thrown on. Helene found that odd when
someone could afford such nice clothes.
On discovering that the journalist and Steve were in a relationship she
had to suppress her surprise, as well as a tinge of disappointment.
***
Gradually, Kat overcame her irritation with Steve’s wooing of the single
mum in the museum café. He was definitely flirting and that made her
dwell on how often he flirted, or worse, with other women. A familiar
preoccupation.
For far too long she’d liked the fact that she wasn’t in love with Steve.
The mutual lack of expectation suited her. But recently it had dawned upon
her that she’d fallen for him.
Steve was out all the time and Kat only saw him twice a week, at most,
which suited her more than him. She never kept tabs. Maybe he’d made the
most of that arrangement. And there had been an assurance, an easy
confidence with no inhibition, when he’d identified a damsel in distress in
the café and attended to her. An approach much practised? He’d picked out
a hot one too. Helene was leaner than her, taller. Her short haircut suggested
Paris more than Walsall and boyishly framed the strong bones of her even
features.
Steve had always paid a lot of attention to Kat’s legs but this woman’s
were longer, more slender, stronger, with a second skin of skinny-fit denim
emphasising powerful calf and thigh muscles. She was athletic and
probably worked out to remain so rangy yet feminine. In time she might go
stringy.
Helene also seemed moody, though it only contributed to her air of being
effortlessly sexy. Single, with a lovely daughter – and Steve was becoming
increasingly interested in having kids. Kat’s penchant for paranoia enabled
her to imagine Steve with the woman and her ready-made family. His
boyish antics would delight the six-year-old.
When she felt sick Kat stopped the punishing fantasy. A dark presence, a
cold pall more than a cloud, pushed again at the edges of her memory:
Graham and his horrible rejection.

They’d had twelve years together in London. Eight years gone but the
coals of that relationship were prone to being raked over if she didn’t
remain disciplined.
Her separation from the only man she’d ever wholly loved had been
excruciating. Graham had left her to start a family with someone else: a
family already under construction, in another flat in West London, while
she and Graham were still together. His deception had been monumental.
Jane had been a mutual friend. Graham had made her pregnant during
the five-month affair that Kat had missed while consumed by the
unravelling of her career and her war with the intern, Clarabelle.
Jane’s pregnancy had finally turned Graham’s sullen dissatisfaction into
a conclusive rejection of what he’d had with Kat. He’d been so relieved
once he’d finished with her. She could still hear the sentence that tore her
apart: ‘I can’t do this any more.’
She’d sat still, bloated yet weightless with trauma in their flat in
Westbourne Grove. A linen curtain had wafted across her face like a shroud.
In that moment, the world had been lifted from Atlas’s shoulders and
dropped onto her face.
Graham had already made Kat infertile. Chlamydia. She’d not known
he’d passed it on when they’d first met. By the time she found out and they
were treated it was too late for her. But not for Graham.
In the café, Kat had to close her eyes for a few seconds before she lost
control of her jaw. She then scraped herself back into the present.
She shouldn’t dislike Helene. Jesus Christ, she lost her brother. A
suicide too. Kat thought of a long drop from a bridge into cold water and
shuddered. She knew unhappiness, she knew desperation, but she’d known
nothing like that. And Helene was here for closure. On that matter, Kat was
tempted to inform her that closure never happened, not really. In time, the
past was partially covered and your memory moved on to fill itself with
other things. But the damage to your hardware remained permanent.
‘You hear this, Kat?’ Steve asked. ‘Her brother ended . . . this happened
near Bristol, not here. But the last anyone knew he was here.’ Steve
emphasised his point by pressing an index finger upon the table. ‘Mmm?
The couple in Cornwall? The walker?’
Helene was frowning. ‘Sorry, I don’t follow.’
Steve turned to her. ‘Oh, just something we’re looking into –’

‘Hardly,’ Kat said quickly to curb Steve’s conspiracy theorising: it was
getting out of hand again. He’d started first thing that morning when she’d
allowed the discussion about Matt Hull to resume. She’d also broken her
vow to herself and shared with Steve what she’d found online – though it
would only have been a matter of time until he discovered it himself and
went mad at her for keeping her findings to herself.
She’d also told Steve that she would consider looking into the
information further before sharing it with her contact on the force, because
she needed more information. Under the table she tapped Steve’s thigh with
her knuckles.
Steve turned to Kat. ‘We’d love to listen to the recordings, though.
Wouldn’t we?’
‘They’re her recordings. And important to Helene.’
‘It wouldn’t be a problem,’ Helene said, looking from Kat to Steve with
her alert blue eyes: long eyelashes, jet-black and velvety. So pretty. ‘Lincoln
wanted to share them. He’d been really excited about having his own album
of noise but it never happened.’ She dabbed at the wet weight of another
tear that had formed in the corner of an eye.
Kat’s heart cracked. She clenched inside with self-loathing for
perceiving this grieving woman as a rival.
Helene blinked her eyes dry and cleared her throat. ‘They are really
weird though. I have no idea what’s making the noises. But they’d be a
better soundtrack than the one they’ve got here. Everything Lincoln
recorded actually came from underground too. Some of it was recorded
close to the caves.’
‘Fantastic,’ Steve said. He clapped his hands. ‘Then we can eat.’

12
‘Steve, no. Absolutely not. What would you achieve?’
‘But it’s what you should be doing. You said you would look into this
more. Well, this is one way of doing that. Just hear me out. This is a story.
Your story, I get that, if it’s anybody’s, but I can help.’
Steve smoothed his hands over the great paper blanket created by the
Ordnance Survey map that he'd brought to her cottage and spread across her
living room floor. The corners were weighted with used Witchfinder
Apprentice CDs he'd mail-ordered.
‘Kat,’ he added with an exasperated finality. ‘Just join the bloody dots.
That paraglider wasn’t lying. Matt. He was clearly warned off from flying
here. People got hurt because one of these farms is growing dope, and big
time.’
‘Matt could be suffering from paranoid delusions, Steve. He had a bad
breakup with his wife. He was also a local hero for finding that cave, but
the cameras moved off him years ago. He’s been left high and dry. I’m not
so sure he handled his fleeting moment of fame all that well, never mind the
fact that it’s now over.’
‘The copper you know in Brickburgh also said there’s past history. A
drug farm bust went down –’
‘Long time ago. Nothing since. Ancient history.’
Steve pointed at the iPod speakers. ‘Then there’s this guy’s parties that
got out of hand.’ A download of Tony Willows solo album, Hark! Hear the
Red Folk Sing played quietly.
‘In the Seventies! Old, old news, mate.’
What drifted through the air of her living room was morbidly haunting;
even the jaunty passages darkened by bleak lyrics. The voice she
remembered distinctly from when Graham had played his Witchfinder
albums. It was thinner on the solo album but still high, melodic, almost
feminine for a man and quavering with more anguish than she remembered.
The pipes accompanying the acoustic guitars were unusual too. Other than

that, it was folk music plain and simple, conjuring a sense of the past or
mediaeval balladry.
‘But a woman even died. At his farm.’
‘People die of overdoses all the time, Steve. In the towns, in the cities
round here now. It’s not uncommon, despite appearances in the tourist
brochures and our rag. You’re trying to rake over a minuscule, out of date
scandal.’
‘Those might not have been parties on Willows’s land. They were more
like . . . like festivals. Rites. Unofficial. All very secretive. Need to know.
Private. Invite only. Crashers were dealt with. That’s what I’ve been told.
It’s weird, but someone – this old guy, Mac, in the pub – said that Willows
wasn’t even present. He was in prison when this stuff really took off. They
were held at certain times each year, for a long time. That’s what Mac said.
Some were an annual thing connected to the moon or something.’
‘Or something? Mac said? Mac? Jesus, Steve! A party once got out of
hand and Willows got in trouble. He’s not interested in any kind of public
life. He’s retired and reclusive. He burned out in the Seventies. Went a bit
Syd Barrett from what I’ve read. It’s safe to assume he’d had enough of
drugs and all that they bring a long time ago.
‘And I asked Sheila about him yesterday. She said they tried, over and
over again, to get him involved with the Divilmouth folk festival and the
big one in Sidmouth. He always regretfully declined. He gave up touring in
the Seventies and he’s just an old hippy that breeds sheep now. No one’s
seen him in public for years. A few old crusties kept his music alive until
the new folk bands revived his back catalogue. That’s the only reason
anyone even mentions him now.’
Steve rolled his eyes. ‘Helene’s brother? He was up there. Redstone
Cross. Where he made those recordings was in the heart of the quarries that
supplied the old paint factories. Redstone. Some of those quarries are on
Willows’s land. Her brother was recording those noises we heard a fortnight
before he died, at Redstone Cross. In a frickin’ quarry, Kat. Come on. And
the couple who said they were going to camp out there? Why did they top
themselves? Did they really? There’s that walker they never found. People
get lost, they climb over the wrong fences, but who knows what he might
have seen out that way? Matt was threatened, victimised, just for
paragliding.’

‘Steve. Down a notch, please. We don’t know anything about Helene’s
brother. Not really, besides him being into drugs. His sister said as much.
He had a weird lifestyle, blah, blah. There could be any number of
contributing factors to his suicide, which, by the way, was near Bristol.
Bristol, Steve. Not Brickburgh. The campers had some kind of suicide pact
in Cornwall. They were nowhere near here when they topped themselves.
The links are tenuous. We have no idea what was going on in their minds
either.’
I mean, you’ve very little idea of what goes on inside mine.
Steve looked at his map in silence. He seemed so young then, a thwarted
boy who desperately wanted an adventure. When he spoke again his voice
had lost its power. ‘What about Google Earth, yeah? What is that?’
He’d shown her the Google Earth satellite photographs of the Redstone
Cross area and Tony Willows’s farm: a few buildings with dark roofs,
strewn down a lane surrounded by unbroken woodland on all sides. Beyond
the trees were miles of pasture, copses of woodland, a series of steep
valleys cut by streams that drained water from the hills: great clefts
separating his land from two neighbouring farms. All remote.
Further along the private lane where Helene said she'd unwittingly
trespassed was another, bigger structure with a newer roof.
What did surprise Kat was how much land Willows owned. She guessed
he must have sold a lot of records and invested his money wisely, or maybe
got a good deal on the land in an economic downturn. The Seventies were a
time of heavy recession. Perhaps the sheep farming had done well, though
that was not something she often heard about the local farming industry.
But what did she and Steve know about farming? Nothing.
West of the buildings was a great flat expanse of ground, bordered by a
thick perimeter of trees. It was this area that Steve had become excited
about. The grass between the woods was marked by what appeared to be a
paler strip of land, resembling a giant cricket pitch. ‘Airstrip,’ Steve had
ventured confidently, tapping it with a finger. ‘Why would a retired folk
singer and breeder of odd-looking sheep need an airstrip? Think about it.’
Only when Steve mentioned an airstrip did Kat see the similarity. But it
might just as easily have been the patterning of crops. How would they
know?
‘Steve, there’s a Land Trust country house right in the middle of all that
farmland, Redacre House. Part of a national organisation and about three

miles from that farm. No one would erect a drug operation anywhere near
one of those places. You’ve got the Saga crowd trekking in and out all
summer to see the award-winning gardens. And don’t say “hidden in plain
sight” or anything like that, because if you start down that road then you
might as well introduce UFOs into your theory. Maybe aliens use the
airstrip and harvest DNA from his sheep?’
Steve took another long swig from his beer bottle. ‘All I am saying is
there’s no harm in just nosing around a bit, on foot. See what gives. Land
Trust put some walkers’ paths through here. It’s not all private land. You
can go on some of it. Public right to roam. The coastal path is open too.
They’ve widened another old green track for the dig traffic. It’s an
accessible area. We’d not be trespassing, just taking a look around.’
‘Big area, Steve. Over twelve miles wide. You might have the leisure to
stroll around it but I haven’t. I need to earn a living from paying
assignments in line with editorial direction.’
‘Not the bit I’m looking at between the cave and Redstone Cross. That’s
no more than three miles as the crow flies.’
‘And what happened to Helene when she wandered up there? Someone
set their dogs on her. She said herself that her brother must have been
trespassing. The quarry, or whatever is left of it, is on private land. And
there are kilns and quarries all over that area. If they weren’t preserved
they’ll be overgrown. All you can see are big gouges in the earth and a few
bricks. I know, I covered the Industrial Revolution Season in South Devon
that was run from Torbay. You could walk straight past an old quarry and
not know it. These aren’t filled with water. They’re just overgrown
earthworks. You’ll never find where Helene’s brother stuck his microphone
in the ground.’
‘How do you explain those noises on the discs then? Shit, they were
freaky.’
They had been: disembodied, ghostly sounds, varying from faint and
enigmatic to outlandish and horrid as they’d filled Helene’s tiny car. Kat
couldn’t think why Helene or her brother would fake the sounds. Nor had
she shared the discs with anyone else in six years.
‘I can’t explain them, Steve. But there is an explanation. Some kind of
wildlife. Little creatures can make huge sounds, especially in enclosed
spaces. The earth moves, you know. It never stays still. The wind can
produce all kinds of noises, even like voices underground. So can water.’

‘You’re reaching.’
‘Not as much as you. You were just talking about some mammoth drug
operation with an airstrip and now you’re basing your story on weird
underground noises. Narcotics and the paranormal. Not my bag, mate.’
Steve took another draught of beer and returned his attention to the map.
‘It could be . . . I dunno. It’s weird.’
‘Can I turn this off now?’ Kat pointed at the iPod.
‘Nah. I like it.’
***
Steve didn’t stay over. Kat had assumed he would. He’d sloped off in
another sulk, taking his map and music with him.
She didn’t like discouraging him but her boyfriend hatched ideas for
new projects on a monthly basis. When in that mood she found him
exhausting. He was a stick-at-nought, a flitter, possessing a restless soul,
one somehow both idle and sporadically bursting with energy.
But something sinister had happened to the paraglider Matt Hull. Kat
believed that much, though whoever Matt had tangled with was never going
to be anyone she planned on doorstepping. People growing cannabis were
none of her business. Though thoughts of the campers, the hiker, the
curious sounds and the recurring idea of red people in the area confounded
her. As did the coincidence she’d happened upon the day before, when she'd
spoken to members of the archaeological team who’d taken part in recent
digs inside the caves: information she’d decided not to share with Steve.
For her feature about the new exhibition she’d requested an interview
with the dig’s site staff. She’d only been seeking a couple of quotes about
the second phase of the dig but had received far more. At the end of the
interview, she’d dropped a few hints about the weirder aspects of the caves,
suggested by Matt Hull’s sinister tales and Helene’s recordings, and been
astonished by her interviewees’ response.
Helene couldn’t have known that similar noises, effectively the sounds
of life that Helene’s brother had accidentally recorded, were reported by
staff working on the dig’s second phase: disturbances transmitted through
solid rock from the direction of a sediment-packed enclave of the cave
system.

From a senior geophysicist, Roger Price, Kat had learned that a number
of on-site staff also claimed to have heard sounds of distress underground:
those of animals and even children trapped on the other side of walls. The
reports had encouraged the archaeological team to explore further south.
What the geophysicist had told her had never gone public. According to
him, a world-famous sedimentologist, a palaeontologist, a palynologist
who’d been examining the soils, two geophysicists who’d mapped below
the surface to detect new artefacts, and a cultural archaeologist who’d been
identifying and interpreting the manmade tools they’d found in the Grand
Chamber, had each encountered the ghostly sounds at some point in their
work. Roger knew them all well. They were scientists and academics and
not prone to spreading stories about unexplained phenomena.
And if Helene’s recordings could be trusted, the caves of Brickburgh had
been issuing strange sounds long before Matt Hull discovered the original
fissure.
Eventually, surely, there would be a theory citing natural causes for the
disturbances. There always was. But there was a story here that could be
printed. She wasn’t going to allude to drug farms or red people or anything
Steve was pawing at her to chase up. But a piece on the eerie sounds from
ancient graves might just bring in another billable assignment.
Over the phone, she’d discussed Roger’s story with Sheila and her editor
had been intrigued by the idea of ‘ghosts’ within the caves. Sheila had
suggested Kat research a supplementary story to the main feature: a nod to
Tutankhamen’s curse in the Valley of the Kings.
By a pure-chance meeting, Helene had put her within reach of a
soundtrack; they could play the soundfiles on the magazine’s website with a
link to the story and credit her brother. Helene might like that.
Kat had sent Helene a message: Was lovely to have met you. Next time
you are down this way do get in touch. She also reminded Helene to let her
have copies of her brother’s recordings from an FTP site.
Helene had readily agreed. And once the article about the cave’s ‘ghosts’
was done, Kat would consign the cave and all of its strange sounds and
curious tragedies to the past.
As for Matt Hull’s situation, she’d unobtrusively keep an eye on that
front but do nothing rash. Steve, she’d keep on a leash.
Kat turned in early. But when her alarm sounded the following morning
it quickly became apparent that her involvement with Redstone Cross and

with all that was piped, whispered and shrieked beneath that hilly earth, was
unwilling to remain at the safe remove she wished for.
***
Kat. They’re back. They paid me another visit. I’m sick of this shit. Just sick
of it. So I’m getting out, yeah? It’s gone too far.
I’m being watched, yeah. All the time now. There’s a car . . . I know it’s
them. It’s getting worse.
The message had been left on her phone in the early hours, and Kat
picked it up later that morning. Matt Hull had also sent photographs.
I swore . . . I swore that next time they tried this shit, I’d be ready. I’d get
a picture. And I did. I got one of them looking through the kitchen window.
I tore out into the garden and I caught one of them running away.
This is sick. So I’m taking off. Clearing out. I’m going to my brother’s in
Somerset for a bit. I won’t be far from my boy. I swear, anything happens to
any of us then you know who’s behind this.
It’s them at Redstone. At the farm. Yeah, I’ve said it. Something’s up with
them again. I don’t know if it’s because I spoke to you. I don’t know. I don’t
know. How would they know who you are? Unless they saw . . . when you
came over. But why now? Nothing for over a year and now I’ve got red
handprints on my door again.
Don’t bother with the police. I’ve called the law. This time I did. And one
of them came round and saw what I’ve sent you. He said he’d look into it.
I’ve heard nothing since.
While he was here, he said it was a prank. Prank? What kind of prank, I
said to him? Painting yourself red, yeah, and looking in a window. What’s
that? That’s sick. It’s threatening behaviour because of what I know.
Has anything been stolen, any damage to your property? That’s what he
asked me. I mean, what’s that? It’s not about that. And there are prints on
the window and door. Get the prints, I told him. Get those prints. He never
did. No one’s been since. I’ve heard nothing.
I’m sorry. Sorry for bothering you with this. It’s my problem, not yours.
Because of what I’ve seen, you know, from the air. And what I did for them.
They know that I know, yeah. They won’t leave it alone, not ever. They were
never going to. I’ve been kidding myself. But everyone’s got a limit. I’ve
reached mine. I’m sick of it. Sick of this shit. I’m in serious –

The message reached the end of its permitted duration and cut off.
Matt Hull had made the call at 2 a.m. He’d been agitated, breathless and
frightened but trying to mask his fear with the bravado that follows
confrontation.
Kat was glad her phone had been recharging in the kitchen: it wasn’t a
call she’d have wanted to entertain alone, half-asleep, after midnight.
At 10 a.m. she called him. He didn’t pick up. She left a brief message on
his voicemail then transferred his picture attachments to her laptop and
enlarged them.
***
The first picture was of a small window, set deeply inside white walls,
above an untidy kitchen sink. But beyond the glass appeared the murky
suggestion of a human face. A woman’s face, Kat thought.
Definitely a head with the skin and features thickly coated in a red daub:
a cosmetic lined by the worn skin beneath and smeared about a pair of
wide, horridly white eyes. A hand with thin fingers had pressed itself
against the window pane, the palm lighter in colour, the nails unpleasantly
extending from three fingers.
The second picture was blurred. Taken as the subject turned from the
glass, perhaps after seeing the flash of Matt’s camera inside the kitchen. But
he’d raced outside his cottage to confront the intruder, touching the screen
as he moved; he’d also uploaded a blurred picture of his own scrawny legs,
another of a foot splayed on the wood-effect lino of his kitchen floor. But
outside, in the rear garden, against a background of night and amidst
evidence of a peeling shed, three large planters on patio stones and the
glimmer of a washing line, ran a single human figure.
The picture had been taken from behind the intruder as she’d retreated,
providing a glimpse of a body darkened by paint: the ankles, knees, hips
and elbows all defined, if not pronounced. Between the spiky joints the
corresponding limbs were narrow, the buttocks pinched and creased above
the top of the thighs. A rack of ribs was discernible below prominent
scapulae and the arms were cast out for balance.
The figure seemed aged, or suffering from an eating disorder, perhaps an
addiction. But an impression of a certain daintiness to its flit across the

small lawn was unpleasantly at odds with the fearsome sight of bemired
skin and emaciation.
What Kat found most unnerving was the wild hair, stretched out into
lengths and oiled into a series of haphazard spikes and tufts. Above such
narrow shoulders it made the head grotesquely large.
The visitor to Matt’s home was horrible. Surely the police would
investigate such a reprehensible intrusion, one solely intended to frighten a
resident. What other reason could account for such behaviour? The woman,
if it was a woman, was surely mentally ill.
At the very least she should call Rick, her contact in police community
liaison. And yet she found herself hesitating and sufficiently nervous to feel
sick. The ‘red people’ existed.
At least Matt was leaving Redhill and not before time. He would be in
less danger in Somerset with his brother. She refused to accept that his son
was in jeopardy at his mum’s in the harbour town. And maybe Matt was
right and it wasn’t her problem.
It did resemble a prank, a horrible one, but a prank all the same. It
wasn’t as if Matt was a vulnerable woman stalked at home: he was a grown
man being menaced by a horrible clown-thing covered in red paint. He was
paranoid and frightened and that was contagious. But who wouldn’t be in
that situation?
Eventually, Kat found herself not wanting to think about it at all,
particularly not his allusions to her being observed at his home by the same
people who’d appeared in his yard and left red handprints on his door.
But by the afternoon, staying silent about Matt’s plight had felt
irresponsible, it nagged and twisted her. Should she have already reported
what he had seen from the air to the police or to Sheila? The two people
ambushed beside their tent: had that really happened? Because Matt saw her
as insurance, he’d talked about her contacting the police if something
happened to him, but not otherwise. She didn’t want to be insurance but
why wasn’t he answering his phone? Feeling sick and drained, she soon
half-convinced herself that she was now implicated in whatever he was
mixed up in. But what was that?
Kat called Steve at home. He didn’t pick up so she tried his mobile. He
didn’t answer straightaway but while she was leaving a message he called
her.

His breathless, excited voice burst through her phone’s speaker. ‘Babe,
hiya. Don’t ask where I am, yeah? Just don’t ask.’
He was outside, she knew that much. Wind buffeted the phone’s
microphone, suggesting open sky. Gortex rustled near his mouthpiece.
‘You’re outside.’ She didn’t say any more but her body tensed.
‘Just passed the dig and on my way to Redstone Cross.’
‘No.’
‘What?’
‘No. I don’t want you to be . . . don’t want you to go up there.’
‘Don’t fuss. It’s cool. I’m not going to do anything.’

13
One by one, the black sheep stopped walking when Steve did and stared at
him. The posture of their bulbous forms suggested expectation. Their thin
legs were set apart and braced for his next move. He imagined they were
waiting for him to speak and was reminded of the sudden interaction with
strange children: patient, insistent kids, instinctively following an adult.
Their presence made him tense.
Ninety minutes of breathless weaving had elapsed before he reached this
impenetrable tangle of brushwood and blackberry vines, untamed between
the boughs of the unappealing wood. Up across the valley floor he’d
crossed spongy turf, turning marshy at the very foot of the valley; following
a stream that often disappeared underground, its hypnotic trickling on his
left side.
Most of the animals were rams, their expressions impassive, though
almost noble in a peculiar way, with long muzzles like the faces in
Phoenician bas reliefs, and powerful grey horns curled into crowns.
He was an interloper here, an intruder, and he imagined that other eyes
might be upon him too. Maybe the landscape itself was aware of his
passage. The suspicion was hard to suppress and contributed to his unease.
A drop in temperature and the dimming light further eroded his resolve to
continue.
The sun’s descent had been swallowed by a sagging ceiling of dark
cloud, an underbelly compressing earthbound shadows into swathes of
gloom. Along the horizon, where the sun remained visible, the light was
intense: white, yet smoky and brushed with sulfur, a nuclear explosion
casting out fiery skirts from end to end of the visible horizon.
And from the darkening cliffs these horned creatures had tottered out to
him, their bellies swinging, black muzzled, Satan-horned. Nine pairs of
beautiful feminine eyes had immediately fixed upon him.
They’d been positioned like sentries on the buttresses of rock at
Whaleham Point, near the Brickburgh Caves. Black shapes standing on
their spindly, ebony limbs above rock faces. The distance between them and

him had been hard to judge, but they’d appeared effortlessly poised upon
narrow grooves in the cliffs, as wide as a human foot, worn by generations
of hooves.
He’d taken photographs of the sheep before the celestial backdrop, their
horned silhouettes in the foreground. Eerie pictures that could have served
for a cover of an old Witchfinder Apprentice album: a landscape at dusk,
the very tones of the artist’s mind. Perhaps the very atmosphere accounted
for why Willows settled here.
The soles of his boots were now claggy with dung. Every square foot of
land seemed beset by leathery plums that squashed and adhered to his feet.
The inside of each calf was shit-smeared. Hasty, he’d been hasty. Not
entirely prepped for this one-man mission either, if he were honest with
himself; he’d left his flat late. That grated.
Kat hadn’t wanted him to come here, but she’d laugh at him if he bailed
now. He’d bailed on a lot of stuff since meeting her. She inspired him but
just as quickly identified the flaws in his designs. He hated that and was
now ignoring her repeated calls. He planned to BS her about there being no
signal on his phone.
Steve looked down the valley and was struck again by the fact that
although he lived not far from this area, and had done for most of his life,
he was unfamiliar with this part of the coast. He hailed from the other side
of Divilmouth, twelve miles south, and had never walked here. It made him
question his desire to escape a place more unfamiliar to him than he’d ever
imagined. He didn’t know anyone who’d walked the coast from Divilmouth
to Brickburgh. This place was truly overlooked. Had it not been for the
cave, no one would ever have come here at all.
Odd, he’d always thought the countryside odd too. No one about. No
one visibly working. British flags on bags of carrots and the odd tractor
holding up traffic were the only evidence of activity in the countryside. And
here was this epic silence about land so open and exposed and inactive but
fenced off, in which these four-legged creatures ambled freely and chewed
and shat. What was the point of it?
Respect to Helene: she’d been fit in more ways than one. Her lungs must
have been bellows to get her lean body up the valley slope. She’d walked
all the way here from the north banks of Divilmouth. He’d not covered half
that ground and was spent. She’d then walked all the way back to her car
once she’d been caught trespassing.

A brief consideration of the young woman’s legs and slender hips
consumed him.
A swimmer’s body.
Stop it.
Kat was too clever not to have noticed his amorous fascination with
Helene. He’d deliberately sat near her in the café. And though hating
himself for the thought, he’d pretty much seen Kat as a hindrance from then
on.
Some women just hung around in his head; Helene was one of them.
Before he’d uploaded his exhibition pictures to the FTP site for Kat, he’d
also made sure to extract the incriminating images. Photos he’d
surreptitiously taken of Helene at the exhibition that were now hidden on
his hard drive. There was an absolute gem featuring her bent over, her
skinny-fit jeans taut as she read a sign before a case of bones.
But this was no good. The sheep had to fuck off now. He needed to press
through the woods beneath the buildings at Redstone Cross Farm.
Willows’s homestead was somewhere on the far side of these trees. The
ground was steep inside the woods and he was at a loss as to how to get
through. But his current upward trajectory should put him near the middle
of the longest buildings as indicated on the satellite map. This next part of
the operation called for stealth, not an entrance heralded by a herd of
livestock. The situation was not without humour and he couldn’t wait to tell
Kat later, though she’d probably blow her stack.
As if arriving with a solution, a ram clopped nearer. Ashamed of his fear,
Steve stiffened. He tried to remember if rams charged and butted with their
horns. Or was that goats?
The creature’s muzzle was stringed with snot. Three of its fellows
followed the leader and ambled over too. The lead sheep bleated at Steve
before disappearing into the trees. They knew the way through. It was as if
they were guiding him now.
***
Ponies. They were staring at him. Black ponies with stocky legs and small
muscular bodies, short heads, broad, bushy tails. Four of them, standing a
few feet from the open door of a barn. Save one strip of light in the roof

where the tiles were long gone, the interior of the building was pitch. The
whole area stank of dung, compost and urine.
Once out of the woods this was the first building he’d found: a shack
tilting in the corner of a muddy paddock. Constructed from vertical planks
of wood, the exterior faded, buckling near the earth. The ground was
churned red mud and black loaves of dung. Not a blade of grass had
survived.
This was not what he expected to find: he’d thought a rock star’s farm
would be smarter.
Farther along the lane, between the barn and another three scruffy
buildings, the verge was overgrown and tangled with thorny vines.
Dandelion stalks protruded en masse.
When he looked in the opposite direction towards Redstone Crossroads,
another roof and part of the upper storey of a dirty house were partially
visible between unmanaged trees and an unruly hedgerow.
An ancient stone wall before the building occasionally showed between
cascades of ivy and wisteria. A metal gate closed off the road a short
distance from the house: the barrier must have been open when Helene
visited. And she’d just wandered in.
While the ponies watched him in silence, Steve knelt down and took
pictures. Hugging the side of the road, his ears straining, he then moved
towards the trio of grey buildings ahead. The sheep were headed in that
direction too; he was following them again, or being led.
Green vegetation, grey slate, rusticated wood and tarmac, dark-red soil;
the colours of the world had been reduced here. And no one cleared the
animal dung. Wheels had visibly compressed it into huge discs on the
tarmac. Tyre treads offered the only sign of recent human occupation. Take
away the farm animals and the place was derelict.
Steve crossed the lane to the other side, his head down. He found a gap
in the long hedgerow to peer at an apple orchard.
From that side of the road he continued to a clutch of structures with
tiled roofs, the largest being the oldest and the second wooden barn he’d
seen since emerging from the trees. The walls were suffocated by untamed
ivy. Wisterias contorted like pythons to the guttering. No vehicles.
The two small stone buildings next to the wooden barn were singlestorey, with greening wooden doors, their padlocks rusted. A single window
at the top of each gable was thick with dust and green algae on the outside.

The panes of glass dimly reflected branches from the unruly trees. Even if
he could reach that high he’d never see anything inside without an interior
light.
A concrete extension jutted from one end of the barn at a right angle, its
white stucco milky-green with sap. A window at head height was so dirty it
only revealed metal bars, painted white and cemented into the sill. An
ancient ceramic sign on the door read: dangerous floor: do not enter.
Steve took pictures.
Where the trees of the orchard thinned on the other side of the road, he
found a third barn, also slouching. There were no doors. A black opening
gaped at the front and the black sheep had gathered outside the miserable
structure. A metal gate, once barring the paddock, lay on its side beside an
overgrown drainage ditch. There was nothing else to see unless he broke a
padlock. The place was impoverished.
Beyond where the sheep congregated the air lightened, suggesting an
open expanse. That must be his ‘airstrip’. Steve called himself a twat.
The lane continued further past the peeling, ivy-smothered buildings
then turned. Untidy hedges curved with it. According to Google, fields and
a continuation of the boundary wood moved eastwards towards a final
building: the one with the newer roof he’d seen on Google Earth.
He wondered if he should check the ‘airstrip’ but if he left the hedgerow
and ventured into open space he’d be more visible. But to whom? Helene
had met two ‘rough-looking posh people’ with dogs. Maybe the couple
lived here with old Tony Willows and that was that. End of story.
No quarry had been marked on the online maps or the most recent
Ordnance Survey map he’d purchased. Steve assumed that whatever
Helene’s brother had mic’d up must be somewhere further down and
beyond this knackered, potholed road.
Feeling more confident, he walked back on himself, towards what must
be the farmhouse. Using the last of the afternoon light, he’d get a few
pictures and take off via the sheep track in the woods. Case closed.
***
Dogs, massive dogs, were still barking and leaping in the road outside the
scruffy house. If he moved they’d see him and come scampering. He’d
never outrun hounds that rangy, that eager for chase.

He’d been stuck behind a wall for thirty minutes and counting. His pulse
hadn’t stopped thumping in his ears and surely his heartbeat had been
audible outside his body. Jerky, panicky compulsions had periodically urged
him to burst from where he’d hidden, to try for the dismal pony paddock.
But he’d stayed put.
One, two, three, four, five . . . no, six vehicles had since entered the farm
and parked beside the farmhouse. Tony Willows had guests: people who
weren’t saying much to each other besides a few muffled greetings.
From as close as he thought safe, Steve had quickly inspected the
farmhouse before needing to hide fast. Tucked away from the lane and
smothered by tree limbs growing over its roof, the building was the kind of
place a person might happen across in an American swamp.
White paint peeled from wood panelling, leaving patches of the building
entirely green with sap from the encroaching plants. Grass sprouted over
the porch like a green wave upon a jetty. Furniture lay discarded, spongy
and mottled upon the wild lawn, the grass broken by numerous lumps of
discarded machinery: car parts or farm equipment, he hadn’t been able to
tell. Stiff, weathered articles of clothing had hung for long enough on that
washing line to be unrecognisable. And yet so many people had come here
in big expensive cars.
Such a state of disrepair was inexplicable unless the musician had fallen
on hard times. And why the enduring seclusion? Willows was largely
forgotten now but had the world been such a terrible place for him that this
was preferable? A mystery Steve was unlikely to unravel, but while he’d
been hidden his drug theory had petered into rags of smoke. This was
hardly the palace of a drug lord.
The last time Steve had been poised to beat a rapid retreat out the same
way he’d come in, a man with a thin ponytail had bounded from the scruffy
house and turned towards the metal gate. So taken aback by the man’s
sudden appearance, Steve had almost spoken out loud and recited his
apologetic excuses for trespassing. But he’d not been spotted. The man in
the oily overalls had not been looking for an intruder and was only intent on
opening the gate to let the vehicles in.
Steve had backed further away from the house, his spine scraping
through verdure spilling over a wall. Once he’d reached a collapsed section
of masonry, he’d slipped over the weed-smothered rubble and crouched in
thick grass. A cascade of ivy now concealed him.

Rumbling and purring cars had filled the lane. And from the old house
had come the excitable dogs. Out of sight, a slamming of doors and a
scuffling of feet and claws on the road surface had ensued. A film of fearsweat had frozen over Steve’s body and not yet thawed.
When the large Volvo 4x4 had parked level with his position, he’d
withdrawn deeper into the foliage, climbing into the broken house’s
unkempt garden, encircled by a slate wall, where he’d remained trapped.
The three dogs had kept up their running back and forth on the tarmac
and the man with the ponytail had remained by the gate, smoking a
cigarette.
Due to the length of the grass, he’d only seen the occupants of the cars
from above the waist but they’d seemed ordinary enough: of mixed gender,
mostly middle-aged and elderly and smartly dressed as if arriving for a
celebration. Slowly and quietly they’d filed through a door above the
sagging porch, like people entering a church.
A few minutes later, everything at the farm changed, the activity, the
very atmosphere and Steve forgot the cold, the damp and the cramp in his
legs.
***
His first reaction to the sound was sheer confusion. Because what kind of
gathering would make such a noise and to what end? It wasn’t exactly
singing but suggested a communal vocal endeavour.
From inside the house came a sustained, high-pitched tone, formed of
many voices raised in unison, rising and falling as the participants caught
their breath before resuming the odd chant.
Had he not been trespassing and crouching behind a broken wall he
might have found the ululation amusing. And though he was unable to
decipher a word, one voice soon raised itself inside the building and
dominated the others. A man’s voice. An elderly voice. Outside in the lane,
the dogs bayed an accompaniment.
The thump of feet upon the lane that followed seemed to stop all
movement inside Steve's body: footsteps accompanied by the timpani of
dog claws on tarmac, closing on his position in the weeds.
The thin, bearded man with the ponytail reappeared, crowded by the
excited dogs, all hurrying down the lane as if towards the nearest

agricultural building. The man entered the pony paddock. From there he
was soon leading the smallest animal into the road. The other three ponies
followed, their heads nodding disconsolately before stopping at the verge.
Cantering sideways the pony in the lane shied away from the leaping
dogs. The man holding the bridle struggled. What Steve could see of his
face was pale, perhaps taut with nervous excitement.
A sound of feet scuffed the wooden boards of the sloping porch and
Steve turned to peer at the house. His view was part-obscured by the vines
of the boundary wall, though not enough to prevent him from seeing what
came out of the back door. A single file, a solemn parade, of naked people.
Not a soul wore a stitch of clothing.
These people were much changed in another way too and for some time
Steve neither blinked nor inhaled, because each person was coloured red
from head to foot.
The red people entered the lane and walked unhurriedly in his direction,
their progress accelerating a collision of possible connections that made
him grow cold.
Tony Willows’s last album, Hark! Hear the Red Folk Sing. Red Folk.
Iron oxide had coated the human remains found in the Brickburgh cave,
on and off, for sixty thousand years.
All too much to be a coincidence with the Grand Chamber no more than
three miles east of where he crouched on Willows’s knackered old farm.
A hippy, folksy thing then? Must be. Pagan folk music thing . . . a
tradition.
Forget the drug farm, this was a weird backwoods Devon thing: an old
man with some influence enacting old practices.
His festivals from the past. A relic of those. Must be. But harmless. Don’t
freak out.
Willows had fried his brains with LSD in the Seventies. Maybe there
was no coming back for Tony. Sure didn’t look like it.
But the campers Matt Hull had seen from the air?
A sudden imagined scenario of himself surrounded by the grotesque red
figures made Steve deeply uneasy.
Along the potholed tarmac the red folk walked barefoot. Sagging bellies,
shrivelled genitalia, wasted breasts: most of the people were getting on.
Pale bluish tattoos, not completely covered by the dye, were visible on

some arms and legs. But only when the last few figures reached his position
did he spot the objects they clutched in their scarlet hands.
All but two of the figures held a dark rock. Two bald, overweight men
trailed spears with stone heads. Weapons. Not something Steve wanted to
see in this context. Those that had hair had teased and lathered it outwards,
stiff with the red stain. They all looked a sight, they looked a fright.
A tiny impulse bade him take a picture, but he dared not even twitch. If
anyone in that ghastly procession peered to the side of the road they’d see
him. Steve pretended he was made of stone.
As they ambled to the pony in the lane, the scratchily bearded face of the
man who held the animal became solemn. His dogs leaped joyously about
the red people. The naked figures stroked the pony, caressing the shivering
beast with their hands while uttering the curious fluting sounds. Red dye
was wiped upon its flanks, ribs and thick neck.
Skittish, the pony’s visible eye went big, white and wild. Steve knew
how it felt.
And on to the far buildings the strange red procession continued, in
single file, led by the man with the paint-smeared pony.
From a distance Steve finally managed to take pictures with the flash
disabled. There was still enough light to catch something. Using the zoom
he enlarged his view of the gathering, watched them enter the open doors of
the largest barn. Inside they went, heads bowed and arms rising as if in
greeting.
This was no longer about what he could find out about missing people or
drugs: the day was now all about Steve’s unrestrained curiosity. His fear on
the wane, he shivered with excitement. One half of his mind, driven by
instinct, still shrieked and begged him to run away fast. Another part, the
one that drove him to surf in high winds and angry breakers, or to dive from
cliffs into the sea, bade him tarry a while longer. This place was too damn
weird to abandon now.
A reckless impetus drove him through the long grass of the garden, past
a sodden sofa, across the moving planks of the porch and right up to the
doorway of the old house.
***

Little had changed inside for some time. Steve doubted it had been cleaned
in a while either.
Just inside the door was a large kitchen area connected to a dim dining
room crowded with furniture, unclean kitchenware, piles of boxes and
building materials. A room reeking of animals and stale grease. Dog
biscuits spilled from steel bowls laid on newspaper, pellets that stuck to the
shit on his shoes.
Beyond the dining room, the hallway was cluttered with buckets, tools,
garden implements, more newspapers. A single lightbulb was lit behind the
front door, the top third of the door crowned by a fantail of stained glass.
Piles of coats and clothes sloped across the table in the dining area.
All of those people had come inside this shitty kitchen and taken their
clothes off, before painting themselves red.
Steve took pictures.
The dye they’d used for their bodies was stored in four plastic buckets,
the kind that DIY stores sold, filled with wood stain.
Confronted by the haphazard domestic arrangements and the electrifying
comprehension of being inside someone’s house without permission, Steve
returned to his senses. He’d seen enough and he turned to head out. Maybe
a quick recce of the barn down the lane and then home-time while the light
was still good. He had a torch if needed.
But Steve failed to take a single step in the direction of the back door.
There had been many times in his life when regret nearly disabled him;
when a terrible disbelief in his own impetuous actions cleared his mind of
all thoughts save a realisation that there had always been other choices,
other ways of doing things. He just rarely chose the more considered
alternatives. These days he experienced the epiphany less, because he was
getting older and took fewer risks, but he felt it again now and powerfully
too: that mixture of defeat, near haplessness and self-loathing, tinged with
nausea.
When he heard the dogs’ claws and the scuffle of boots on the path
before the porch, this deep sense of regret peppered his forehead with
sweat. Only way out for him now was further inside.
Before he could think it through, Steve ran across the kitchen, wheeling
around the impediments upon the floor. Inside the adjoining hallway, he
ducked through the nearest doorway at his left. And entered a parlour.

Within the moment he had to establish what he’d fled into, he thought
the light fitting too ornate for the chaotic space: a bulky shade of redstained glass, unlit, hanging over a room cramped with heavy furniture.
Dark antique chairs and a settee piled high with clothes and papers
choked the floor. Save the big curtained bay window, the entire wall-space
was festooned with framed photographs that reflected the thin light
escaping the hall.
A dresser was filled with broken stones. A vast fireplace gaped and
seemed to exude, like some horrid mouth, a reek of dog, engine oil and a
vinegary, sebaceous human odour. But only at the conclusion of his hurried
appraisal did Steve catch sight of the wizened form sunk inside the easy
chair before the windows. A hunched thing, a wheelchair collapsed against
the armrest. So dark had the dye made her shrunken flesh that he’d not seen
the occupant when he came in. Now he gaped.
A patterned tray of mostly uneaten food lay beside the figure’s lumpy
red feet. Asleep, or worse, its eyes were closed. It was a woman. Breasts
shrivelled like large raisins gave the gender away. The head was mostly
hairless.
Behind the wall, the kitchen filled with dog claws on lino, canine
whines, barks and the muted thump of booted feet.
Steve performed a quick one-eighty and dropped behind the open door.
Then pulled it towards himself until the door’s edge met the armrest of the
long sofa. A rustle and a thump sounded as his tailbone struck the skirting
board, but there he squatted, squeezing his jaws closed.
All of his concentration and will were required to calm his breathing, the
air whistling through his nostrils forming tiny screams. He dearly wished
that he was a smaller man so the top of his head would not be visible.
Directly outside the room, a man shouted ‘Stay!’ To Steve it sounded as
if the dogs were jumping up the walls of the hall.
Steve’s last act was to slide a musty towel from the back of the sofa to
cover his head, which he pressed into the sofa’s bristly rear panel. His body
behind the door, his towelled head jammed behind the sofa looking down at
a scruffy carpet rimed with grey dust, he didn’t know how visible he’d be to
whoever entered the parlour.
The very presence of the man in the room ignited the inside of Steve’s
skull into a storm of white terror. He even wondered, stupidly, if he should
stand up and apologise for being inside the house.

How he stayed still, he wasn’t sure.
He was unable to see what was happening inside the room, only hearing
the man’s feet on the floor and seemingly too near his head. Mercifully, the
dogs had done the man’s bidding and waited outside where they whined.
They’d have sniffed him out for sure. But as each long second dragged
itself through an awful stasis, with his consciousness taut as a snare drum’s
skin, Steve anticipated the fall of a hand upon his shoulder, a barked
challenge or the sudden yanking away of the towel and a horrible exposure.
Instead, he heard the crack of knee joints. Then the man muttered softly
on the far side of the room. Steve presumed he was speaking to the old
thing in the armchair. ‘Now. Time, mother. They’re here. The children are
waiting. Come now. That’s it. That’s it.’
There followed a snapping metallic sound and the noise of a spring
extending, which Steve understood to be the unfolding of the wheelchair.
A startled cry came next and a sound resembling a child’s sob when the
woman’s rest was disturbed. Then she took to whimpering as if roused from
an awful dream.
The man quieted her with cooing sounds from the roof of his mouth. A
strange interaction muffled by the density of the ancient upholstery Steve
hid behind, but his shock still mingled with a heightened sense of the
absurd.
‘She’s come close,’ an elderly voice announced. ‘The den is full. She’s
not alone.’
‘Yes, yes. It’s time.’
‘Up so far. So far again. We must respond.’ The voice was cracking and
frail but the woman was well spoken, her tone deeper than Steve expected
from a person of such advanced years.
‘Yes, mother.’
‘Their bellies yawn. Are we safe?’
‘Of course. Everything’s okay.’
‘You know what they bay for. What they want. And there’s outside
getting inside again.’
‘No. Everything’s fine. Just the red here. I’m going to lift you now. We
can’t wait any longer or they’ll be through . . . with us. We don’t want that.’
‘It’s in the air. The outside. You wouldn’t know it.’
‘There. That’s it, sit.’

Steve heard the sound of springs compressing, the air squeezed from a
cushion.
The old woman sounded frightened. ‘Around . . . here. They’ve come in.
I can tell.’
‘Yes, it’s all open. The air is alive. We’re only waiting for you. We’d
never start without you.’
‘But we’re safe? The gate?’
‘Yes, mother. Just friends here. Only the red.’
‘No one else?’
‘No one else.’
‘Then I must have a face to greet the red.’
‘I have it right here.’
***
The sound of the chair’s wheels and the crowding pack of excited dogs
moved away from the odoriferous pall in which Steve crouched. Beyond
the interior wall he heard the man and his mother navigate the porch.
Slowly, Steve raised his head and peered around himself, half-expecting
a trap, their leaving the house mere pretence.
When he finally straightened his spine a picture frame rattled behind his
shoulders. He turned his head, afraid he might knock something from the
wall, and peered into a dust-filmed photograph of Witchfinder Apprentice.
Sideburns, long hair, two bearded musicians in a folk rock ensemble of
eight, posed like kings around a mediaeval banquet. A table heaped with
platters of fowl, fruits and bread, mimicking a classical still-life painting.
Already balding, a young Tony Willows was visible at the head of the
table, glaring as if with disapproval at the frolics the record company had
imposed upon his band for a gatefold sleeve. The picture was taken from
the cover artwork of Below the Green. Steve had bought a second-hand
copy from Amazon.
As he came out from behind the sofa, he listened intently for any sign of
movement within the house.
Nothing.
He turned and took photographs of the wall. Lots of strange figures were
up there wearing suede jackets with wide lapels and bell-bottom trousers.

Arms circled shoulders in pictures so brown with age the subjects seemed
to have origins in the American Wild West.
The band had also favoured rural settings for press shots and often stood
at gates or sat on fences, or posed before rock formations. Some of the latter
might have been the Tors on Dartmoor. There were other pictures of the
band playing live in monks’ vestments and again in masks with long noses.
Hippy Slipknot, Steve thought and nearly smiled.
Most of the photographs covering that wall of the dreadful parlour were
of the band playing live, standing before mic stands, their fiddles and
guitars held high. A wall of folk. The band had been huge for a couple of
years. He could see that from the crowd sizes at the festivals: Knebworth,
The Isle of Man. And before the stages swayed oceans of handlebar
moustaches and girls with dead-straight hair. Cheesecloth, denim and
prairie dresses: young people who’d adored the thin musicians in their
pointy hats standing on stages strewn with black wires.
Dozens more pictures above the fireplace were similarly faded and dustfilmed: lineup changes, female backing singers that were dead spits for
Karen Carpenter, Tony standing beside a Jag, all the guys dressed as Morris
dancers. Later in their career there was evidence of berets and trilby hats,
white waistcoats and matching flared trousers, sunglasses, when it all went
a bit Toto.
Steve listened again for sounds within the house. He held his breath.
Nothing.
He took in the wall beside the vast wooden dresser. There was a gold
disc for Before the King of Bedlam. The glass was cracked and the frame
strewn with cobwebs. Another gold disc for Gallow Ballads, a silver for
Thin Len and Choker Lottie. A poster for the Run with Hounds tour,
supported by The Incredible String Band, 1972. Steve took more pictures.
He daren’t dither but a quick inspection of the dresser confirmed that the
shelves were crowded with stones and bones: artefacts. Reasonable to
presume their origin was the Brickburgh caves. Flint hand-axes, tooled
bones and spearheads; he’d seen the same at the exhibition. Two Venus
figures took pride of place on the top shelf, naked, bulbous and beastheaded. Dull clay bodies absorbing the weak light seeping from the hall’s
solitary bulb.
He left the parlour. Glancing at the wood-panelled wall that rose with
the stairs into the darkness of the first floor, his eyes alighted upon a framed

photograph.
A black and white picture featuring a line of men and women in a field,
the sun shining on a wide sea behind them. They were naked save for the
crude masks. Headdresses crafted to resemble lions or dogs or something
like that. Steve wasn’t sure.
A second picture outside the kitchen gave further evidence of outdoor
shenanigans from mad crusties back in the day. He squinted to better see
these women with flowers in their hair, their bared bodies painted dark. All
were laughing and tiptoeing around a big dog-thing made from straw,
erected in a field. One of the girls held a champagne bottle that looked
heavy at the end of her slim wrist.
The ceremonies on his land. The rumours in Divilmouth pubs not so farfetched after all. Fuck you, Kat. Excuses for getting pissed and screwing
groupies by the look of it. Posho rock stars living it up through a decade of
strikes, IRA bombs and factory closures.
The pictures were a bit sinister too, the age of the images not solely
accounting for the unpleasant impression given by these rural antics. Steve
really disliked the headgear. All of the people in the fields had their faces
concealed by grotesque masks. Wispy hair drifted beneath the snouty and
horned concealments.
And what on earth were they enacting while naked and daubed in scarlet
body paint in the colour picture? That was set at a tilt before the kitchen
doorway. In that scene a dozen people wearing doggish masks surrounded a
ram, its horns garlanded with wild flowers. Big wobbly canine heads atop
pale English shoulders, red faces peering through the mouthpieces: ten
women, two men.
Tony had liked naked girls around him: that was obvious. Girls painted
like savages seemed to be the norm. He still favoured the practice too.
There was continuity with the present, albeit with adjustments to the age
range if the shrivelled woman in the chair served as evidence.
Fuck’s sake.
A firelit procession somewhere underground came next on the wall of
past shames. A cave maybe. Animal faces and naked cocks, exposed nubile
breasts, beer bellies and black body hair slathered in red paint: people
walking past a rock wall painted in the style of the Grand Chamber of
Brickburgh. Where was that taken, and when?
Steve took his own pictures.

At the threshold of the hall, he paused and made sure the coast was clear
out back. He heard the wind in the treetops and a distant rhythmic squeak of
the wheelchair’s rotating wheels, growing quieter.
He stepped out.
No dogs.
But what was that? A tremor? An earth tremor? A grumble beneath his
feet, the house, the earth.
It passed away.
With his head down he made it to the garden path. Peered down the lane.
No way. Steve raised his camera and zoomed in on the spectacle in the
middle of the private road. At an angle, he could still see the bearded man
from behind. His body was also now stained red from his thin neck to his
bony feet. His progress was slow and made with measured pomp,
displaying a regal absurdity in the manner in which he pushed the elderly
woman in the wheelchair.
Though it was obscured by one of the man’s arms and his back, Steve
was still able to determine that the old woman’s head was covered by a
bulky and hairy headdress. When she turned her head to one side, almost as
if she were trying to look behind her chair and at Steve, through his zoom
he glimpsed a horrid black muzzle, detailed with yellowing teeth. A wolf
from a pantomime too scary for kids.
“Then I must have a face to greet the red”. That’s what she’d said when
Steve had been hiding.
Meet who? The red sickos in the barn? The “children”?
Steve pulled back. Beneath his feet the earth growled again as if a
restless giant had just stirred in some cold barrow.
He pushed his head out. The odd couple continued towards their
destination: the barn. They seemed unconcerned by the possibility of what
appeared to be a freak earthquake.
Like the inside of a furnace seen from a distance, the mouth of the
agricultural building now glowed red. And across the darkening, overgrown
farm, the couple walked as if to an open mouth, one as fiery as their own
bodies.
Fuck’s sake.
Steve knelt down and took a picture, catching the watery grey dusk and
fire-flickering gloom. He could blow it up later. And with the doorway so
ruddy with light now, he’d chance a couple more shots of the barn. He’d go

a bit closer and then split. He’d not be far from the pony paddock and he
could slip through there easy. Luck was on his side tonight. So preoccupied
were these people with their twisted red shit, it was like he’d been invisible
to them.
This decision to linger became irrevocable when his nose detected a
familiar scent: cannabis. On the southerly breeze, dope fumes were being
blown back toward the house. Hashish. Marijuana. A citrusy, sausage-meat
blend of something potent and intensely pungent billowed across the farm.
A lot of dope was getting smoked too. If he could smell it from this far
away, the fragrance must be literally belching out of that building. It was
like those red people were hot-boxing an old barn. Drug farm scenario was
back on the table.
Tony, you pervy old fiend.
The man and the elderly woman in the wheelchair disappeared inside the
barn. As if to herald their crossing of the threshold, the earth surged again,
its vibrations registering through the soles of Steve’s boots.
Bent over like a war photographer in a combat zone, he jogged down the
lane and paused beside the pony paddock. Crouched, he got off a couple
more shots of the doorway in zoom. No one was visible inside the bloodied
light of the barn, but sticklike shadows were being cast up the interior walls
as if the occupants were prancing about inside.
Steve switched camera mode to film and crept closer. And that’s when
he became aware of another development: the introduction of a new
soundtrack to this surreal evening.
At first he’d thought it was the wind but the fragrant air around him was
being moved by little besides a faint breeze. No, it wasn’t wind, this was
music that he was hearing. Or rather a series of piped notes was now
drifting from the direction of the barn.
A new musical direction, Tony?
Steve immediately thought of Helene’s recordings, those her brother had
made years before: it was definitely the same sound. But louder, bigger, a
replication of those subterranean sounds that begged the question: had
Helene’s brother recorded one of these rituals or whatever this was?
The piping’s volume increased. Soft and woody but insistent and
building to strident as if an orchestra was warming up the recorders to hit
the right notes. It would all look eerie on film with the tendrils of smoke
drifting from the flashing red interior of the barn.

Steve recorded from the side of the lane until he flinched so hard he
nearly fell.
Had he ever heard the sound of a terrified horse before? Maybe, in a
film or something, but not one so frightened. The pony's screams of distress
projected horribly from the reddish doorway and funnelled up the enclosed
lane: cries accompanied by a distant stamp of hooves on stone.
Raised human voices broke into fresh high-pitched whines, in turn
transforming into savage shrieks, competing with the pony’s. The
cacophony was so horrid that Steve hardly noticed the next earth tremor.
And he was clueless about what issued the next series of cries. But again,
he’d encountered similar on Helene’s recordings.
The long howl suggested the wolf. A comparison Steve dropped when
the ululating cry descended into a semi-human whine. And then a pair of
big cats might have been fighting inside the barn, until the wet growls
erupted into apelike screams that twisted again into a sadistic mockery of a
human voice. The hideous medley chattered out of the old building and left
Steve rigid with a terror he’d not encountered since childhood.
Red light flickered and beat the barn's interior walls. The pony’s piteous
bellows shot up an octave then abruptly ceased.
Shocked, fearful human sighs rose in group effort.
Wet sounds followed, amidst those of cracking timber, or joints, as
something large was torn apart inside that wretched shack.
The rapid jabbering of the aggressor continued, partially impeded by
gargles as a wide throat filled with liquid. This final noise muted, then sank
as if the animal had returned beneath the ground.
There followed a hushed sound of awe from those gathered inside the
building.
The tremors beneath the ground ceased.
On weak legs, Steve turned to leave at precisely the same moment that
three dogs bounded from out of the barn. They came at him fast and low,
snarling like hounds pouring from the mouth of hell.
***
Steve had made it as far as the treeline behind the pony paddock when the
first dog leaped upon his back.

His face clouded with meat-breath canker and enraged snarls. His mind
offered a mental image of a lioness gripping the haunches of a gazelle, and
down to his knees he crashed, wet leaves and greasy red soil embracing his
tumble. The dog he flung clear.
A second dog seized his forearm with jaws capable of snapping bone
like tomato cane. Teeth tore through his coat, his skin stretched taut around
the canines before giving way like pastry beneath fork prongs.
Trees, dark sky, nettles and blackberry vines, all of it whirled through his
eyes and the inky, dusky air dispersed his hyperventilating breath. Much
louder still were the barks and snarls and growls of the dogs, even louder
than the foaming of blood between his ears. Here was an urgent desire to
destroy him, the only purpose of these hot moments in a realm of soil and
yellow teeth.
He clouted a dog’s muzzle with his camera. Foamy jaws released his
arm. Black gums flashed. A purple tongue curled like a mollusc. In the
undergrowth the dog shook its head and tried to sneeze.
Black blood dripped from the cuff of that sleeve. Steve saw the dripdripping of his own life and sucked in a huge breath. He thought he might
cry real tears. He was bitten through. He’d never been bitten by a dog
before.
He staggered onwards, going down twice, yet rising to his feet and
falling into tree trunks. Careening through scrub he ripped his trousers into
sideways mouths. Cold air embraced his balls.
A dog seized his leg, behind the knee. He felt the teeth go right inside
his body, slicing fat and piercing muscle. That whole leg bruised to the
thigh in a heartbeat. The hound tried to dig its hind legs into the soil to put
the brakes on his rout. He dragged it across the ground when its jaws
refused to release his leg. Ruffled snout and beady eyes, ears back, it
partnered him down the slope between the trees, all four paws skidding.
Another of the hounds took up the wretched colours of his tattered,
bleeding forearm. The arm-bone was the lowered shaft of a regimental
lance in a massacre. While gripping the exposed pole of his forearm the dog
bunched its considerable neck muscles to try and twist him down and onto
his face.
Throat. It wants . . .
He had no speech, no cries save whimpers. Odd words failed to become
sentences in his mind. All was darkness and teeth in black mouths that

shook meat on the bone. A smell of wet leaves. Mulch and cold air about
the thin body of a weary, frightened boy in trouble.
But onwards he dropped, using the slope of the earth and gravity to
propel him through the gloaming wood towards the lighter air above the
fields below.
I . . . the pony . . .
He fell from the treeline and into the dung-bumpy grass. He landed on
all fours. Turf sodden with moisture registered through the skin on his
knees. His attempts to remove himself from the terrible wet sounds of the
hounds’ long mouths that gripped his flesh were faltering. His head filled
with a light bright and white. He bellowed, pushed on.
This fresh surge of strength raised two dogs completely from the earth.
They hung on with their teeth like big leeches. Three were fastened to him
now. He could feel another set of teeth grinding against an ankle bone. The
backs of his legs were wet. The arse of his trousers was entirely ripped
away.
He hurt and kept on hurting but adrenalin pushed him another ten steps
out from the treeline where he screamed for help. All three dogs held fast.
The pack was wearing him down.
Trained.
Somehow, he still held onto his camera and had it raised above his head
like he was wading through water. He brought it down hard on the skull of
the dog chewing up his arm. It yelped, closed one eye and staggered
sideways.
A human voice bellowed. ‘Cunt! Don’t you touch my dog!’
Steve looked behind himself, turning his heavy body with a skirt of
canine flesh swinging from his limbs. When he saw the line of red people
most of his remaining strength leaked out of his legs like warm water.
‘Oh, fuck. Oh, fuck,’ he said to the sky.
They fanned out, at least a dozen people. Wild, greased hair and intense
red faces slowly moved about him, patiently accompanying his insufficient
progress into the valley. Like the sheep that had followed him up the slope
earlier, the red folk traipsed in silence. And like indifferent animals, the
aboriginal horrors were content to survey his terrible sufferings without
making any attempt to alleviate them. From the great white orbs of their
eyes, he thought he detected excitement at his plight.

Terrible pain washed hotly through his legs, verging on the agony that
drains a body white and limp. One foot squelched and he dared not look
down. He was slowing, his adrenalin spent. Steve called out for his mother
and his voice broke.
The man with the beard stepped forward, came in close. He held a black
rock. His ratty face snarled, baring snaggled teeth, a mouth like one of his
dogs. An eye was scarred with a milky slash. A sinewy arm punched the
black stone into Steve’s face.
Crunch.
A tremor jarred Steve’s entire head. His sight went out, was all white
dots in darkness until half of his vision returned. He saw spit loop from his
own mouth. That scent. Was he smelling his own brains?
Dogs tugged and tore. A tooth severed some big nerves in a leg, there
were pins and needles like he’d never known before and the corresponding
foot turned cold, then numb. His balance slid sideways.
Sky, dogs . . . all the red ones watching . . .
Trapped in a delirium of exhaustion, a frantic swirl of thought and
memory filled his skull: his mind was objecting to what was happening
right now, but refusing to process what now meant, or to acknowledge
where it was leading. He had odd thoughts that wanted to take him out of
himself. He and his cousin wearing matching swimming trunks, running
across the sand. They were children, laughing boys. ‘Gary, help us out,’ he
whispered.
There, the sea in the distance . . .
His mother, wearing a brown jumper that he’d not seen in thirty years. A
polished wooden brooch of an owl was pinned to the wool. She wiped tears
from his freckled cheeks with her thumbs.
I’m down. Mum . . .
Then darkness.

14
Handsome and as immaculately presented as ever, Kat’s editor clumsily
picked around the cabinets of her chic office to locate an additional salve: a
bottle of water. Kat never came into her boss’s office to cry, but in moments
found herself dabbing her eyes with a tissue Sheila provided.
Sheila’s glasses blazed in the sunlight lighting up her windows. Only
when her eyes were momentarily visible did Kat note her editor’s
discomfort and assumed, not without prior evidence, that catering for an
employee in distress was an unfamiliar activity.
Sheila preferred the ‘quiet life’. That was the prevailing opinion at the
magazine when Kat began freelancing for L&S, seven years earlier. Married
to a wealthy man called Adrian, who owned the magazine and kept L&S
going as a project for his wife, Sheila wasn’t difficult as far as bosses went.
In fact, she was unfailingly courteous and rarely succumbed to anger. Prone
to favouritism maybe, but that tendency had only ever benefited Kat. Sheila
had always been deeply impressed with her CV.
Mistaken from the very start, Sheila had assumed that Kat was cut from
the same silk as her peer group: an older posho It Girl, who’d led a
glamorous life in London before semi-retiring in Devon. A journalist who
only continued to keep her hand in as a hobby.
Like so many of the affluent, and Kat had met some seriously wealthy
people in her line of work, Sheila’s idea of elsewhere was lacking.
Innumerable and discreet partitions separated her from the ordinary world
and the multitude that struggled out there. Her name even graced the side of
her husband’s sixty-foot yacht in Divilmouth. And once Kat had identified
Sheila as a conflict-averse socialite and passive control freak, so much
about the woman and the periodical made more sense: anyone who
threatened Sheila’s bubble was anathema. She either pretended they didn’t
exist, or reached into her extensive social network to outsource the
difficulty.
In their professional relationship, Kat had only ever been required to
agree with everything that Sheila thought and said. She only ever pitched

her ideas to her boss casually, in one-to-one meetings, and only those topics
that reinforced Sheila’s notions of what was of interest to her world. That
was how Kat had prospered at L&S.
The discourse the editor maintained in print was directed at those with
plenty of disposable income: folks interested in luxury and the leisure
opportunities their affluence afforded them. Most of the readership was
retired or only resided in the area when using a second home. L&S was no
place for real news. Nothing could be found in its pages about the multiple
local crises in the NHS and Devon’s care homes, or the falling wages and
paucity of school places, or the lack of infrastructure investment and
affordable housing. Those concerns didn’t touch the readership.
Subscribers received the publication sealed inside a polythene bag. The
magazine’s lifespan expired after a few months of idling upon elegant tables
in spas, hotels, private dentists and conservatories blessed with panoramic
sea views.
Over half of each monthly edition was paid for as advertorial for chi-chi
businesses in the Southwest: vast hotels, retirement villages, Michelinstarred restaurants, farm shops, private boarding schools, cruises, wine
importers. Kat wrote many of these advertorials: commercial copy dressed
up as feature articles. Local interest pieces about notables, cosy histories,
wildlife initiatives, charity balls and society news filled what remained of
each edition.
Professional survival was about consensus, not creativity, or blue-sky
thinking, or rocking the boat, or originality. In Kat’s experience, an
employee’s longevity depended on identifying the key figures in a business
who struck the drum, before dancing deferentially to their rhythm.
In light of what Matt Hull dropped on her the night before, before failing
to return her calls, and combined with Steve’s failure to return her calls or
reappear at his flat, when Sheila summoned her to discuss the supplement,
Kat’s front had slipped for the first time in seven years. But here was also a
chance to acquire a second opinion from someone who would know
someone, who would know something about Redstone Cross. Sheila.
‘Well, I really don’t know what to make of this, Kat. So much to take in
all at once,’ Sheila said, peering at one of Matt’s pictures on Kat’s tablet.
Her expression suggested she’d seen half of a worm wriggling in the apple
she’d just bitten through.

She looked away from the tablet screen and her concern eventually
overrode her distaste. ‘Steve first. Where do you think he could be?’
Kat shook her head. ‘He always calls back, eventually.’
‘He was off on a walk, you say?’
‘Not really.’ Kat sighed.
Here goes. She then took Sheila through Steve’s theory and motivation
for taking a ‘look around’ Tony Willows’s farm.
‘My word, he is intrepid. I had no idea.’ Sheila looked out of the
window while she considered the preposterous information she’d just
received.
Kat embellished her story with the catalogue of Matt Hull’s revelations
and grievances about his persecution at the hands of the ‘red people’.
Finally, she passed her phone to Sheila so that her editor could listen to
Matt’s recorded message.
‘I feel sick with worry, Sheila, for both of them.’
‘I can imagine,’ the editor said in a neutral tone, though one clearly
fringed with the dismay of having to concern herself with the situation.
As a footnote, Kat mentioned the girl she and Steve had met at the
exhibition, Helene Brown. Only when she’d described the girl’s recordings,
adding that her brother went missing, presumably killing himself within two
weeks of making his final recordings at Redstone Cross, did Sheila’s tone
change.
‘How simply awful,’ she said, though little else and when she spoke
again her voice had thinned. ‘I can see how a wild imagination might . . .’
Her attempt at a reassuring smile was so awkward that the gesture was
quickly abandoned. She closed the conversation.
‘I have a meeting in five minutes, dear. I’m not even remotely prepared.
Can this wait until I’ve made some calls? If you come back at . . . let’s say
four thirty, we’ll try and get to the bottom of this. I’d also like to show these
pictures to someone.’
‘Of course.’
‘You’ll see Steve again. So I don’t think you should worry,’ Sheila said,
swinging her chair left and right to collect papers and to operate her desk
mouse: ever Kat’s cue to leave. ‘The thing is to not get yourself too worked
up, dear. Not to let your imagination run riot like our Steve did. I know
someone on the force who’ll look into this.’

‘Thank you, Sheila. I really appreciate it. I’m sorry for bothering you
with it.’
‘Oh, nonsense. Makes the job a bit more exciting. But keep trying his
phone. The cliffs out that way can be . . . a bit tricky.’

15
Tony Willows’s thematic preoccupations were predominantly
derived from M. H. Mason’s Ancient English Poems and Ballads,
published in 1908. Some of Mason’s verses were, in turn, newer
versions of compositions in Francis James Child’s The English
and Scottish Popular Ballads and Thomas Percy’s Reliques of
Ancient English Poetry. Yet almost all of Tony Willows’s lyrical
output was inspired by the most gruesome and grotesque
interpretations in Mason’s ballads.
Wikipedia
Kat unlocked her front door at eight. She’d taken the second meeting with
Sheila, at which her ‘friend on the force’, a detective called Lewis, had been
present. Following the editor’s summons, the officer had arrived swiftly.
That hadn’t surprised Kat as her boss’s local reach seemed infinite.
After the meeting, Kat had driven to Steve’s flat. He’d still not returned
so she’d put in an unannounced visit at his parents’ vast house in
Divilmouth.
As Reg and Delia had been denied contact with their cherished son since
the previous evening (apparently he checked in every morning), his mother
was already walking the foothills of frantic when Kat rang the doorbell.
This served to ease Kat’s passage into the six-bedroom mothership.
Reg and Delia had claimed they’d wanted to call Kat but didn’t have her
number. Although she had been involved with their son for over three years,
his parents still had no means of contacting her in an emergency. In a more
benign situation, Kat would have spent time analysing the subtext of this
communication failure. Instead, she’d extracted their promise to ring round
his friends and left.
Kat had written down the names of everyone in the group of men Steve
spent so much time with. She didn’t have contact details but Reg and Delia
knew most of their parents.

Kat’s anxious wait beside the phone continued through the evening. By
nine, she’d still heard nothing from Detective Lewis, though he’d promised
to keep her updated. Earlier he’d patiently, though not without a hint of
inappropriate amusement, sat through Kat’s retelling of Steve’s hunches,
Helene’s recordings, Mat Hull’s stories, his pictures and the recorded
message. The pictures Kat had also forwarded to Lewis at his request. He’d
told her not to erase Matt Hull’s phone message just in case it was
‘pertinent’.
The detective had then disappeared to ‘ask around’ about Steve, as he’d
put it. Interestingly, before he left, Lewis claimed to know Willows. He’d
been out to his farm several times following a series of break-ins and the
theft of some farming equipment. The gang from Plymouth who’d been
raiding rural properties in that area had eventually been caught. But Lewis
had scoffed at the idea of Tony Willows producing or supplying drugs.
‘He’s just an old man. Bit grumpy but harmless. I was up there about a
year ago. Someone had drained one of his diesel tanks. His health wasn’t so
good and his place is falling to bits. Has been for years. I don’t get the
impression he’s all that flush these days. Hasn’t played gigs in a while and
doesn’t get the royalties he used to.’
According to Lewis, Steve’s ‘airstrip’ was a field given over to Tony’s
son for racing his motorbikes.
So where was Steve?
Perhaps Steve and old Tony had become fast friends and were sharing a
joint right now as an old Witchfinder Apprentice album played on the
stereo. The idea briefly took hold in Kat's imagination only to disperse
when she recalled Helene’s story about the dogs and the hostile couple
who’d confronted her. Trespassers were clearly not welcome at that farm.
In her home office, Kat attempted to distract herself, as much as she was
able, by delving deeper online into Tony Willows and Redstone Cross.
She’d glanced at Willows’s Wikipedia page after Matt Hull had reappeared
on her radar and briefly perused it when Steve made it glow brighter with
his theories, but she'd never identified anything worth pursuing in depth.
Now that Steve had travelled to snoop on Willows’s land and not been seen
since, she found herself revisiting her internet tracks more thoroughly.
Once her eyes and thoughts had stopped jumping about her laptop
screen, she learned a little more about how haematite and limestone had
been mined in parts of Brickburgh from the 1800s until the 1950s. The

biggest quarry was near Redstone Cross but she could find nothing else
about the site online.
She moved on to the scores of articles available about Tony Willows and
Witchfinder Apprentice at fan sites.
An online encyclopaedia of folk music seemed to be the most popular
site, one recognised and endorsed by many musos and critics. Kat skimread the biographical entry for Witchfinder Apprentice:
The darker musical tones that accompany their songs distinguished the
band from most of their folk rock contemporaries. From the group’s
founding in Warwickshire in 1966, the musical direction was driven by
Willows, who hailed from Leamington Spa . . .
The band’s electric sound grew to be harder than any other folk band of
1969. Increasingly, the recorded music was underwritten with big rock
arena drumming. Full harmony choruses tempered the sad and tragic tales
with lingering melodies . . .
By 1973 Witchfinder Apprentice’s ominous down-tuned electric guitar
sound was higher in the mix, though still blended with the traditional styles
of English folk music . . .
A refusal to lighten the tone hampered more than the fleeting
commercial success the band had enjoyed between 1970 and 1973; this
heavier direction also disaffected many of the band’s musicians.
‘I was fed up with Tony the grim and moody. After a while the songs
were giving me nightmares. They were a bad trip all by themselves when
you were playing them, over and over again, six days a week,’ ex bass
player Rob Pryor said in a BBC interview in 1973 . . .
Most critics believed that Willows’s musical obsessions with madness,
bloody revenge, demoniac possession, black magic, witchcraft and human
transformation by means of the supernatural were solely responsible for
enshrining the band’s enduring cult status among so many progressive and
black metal musicians for subsequent decades. The band’s antecedents can
be found in heavy metal more than the folk music that followed Witchfinder
Apprentice.
The list of song titles for their last album, Friends of the Dark, caught
Kat’s eye. The record had been recorded when all had been going south for
the band and released after their acrimonious split in 1978.
‘Old Black Mag’

‘Call the Hungry Worm with This Horn’
‘A Gest of Woe’
‘The Death of Proud Lamkin’
‘The Slaughter of Bonny Lizie’
‘Saw You My Body?’
‘The New-Slain Knight’
‘Bar the Door to Old Friends’
‘The Lord in the Well’
‘The Friar Wrapt in Blanchfour’s Skin’
‘Crust Beggar’
‘Young Quin Buried a Fair Lad’
‘The Daemon’s Rantin Daughter’
Kat got the gist of the subject matter without analysing the lyrics.
There had been seven Witchfinder Apprentice studio albums; their chart
positions were given between 1968 and 1978.
Their ascendance was as well documented online as their fall. The latter
was attributed to three changes of management, three record labels applying
pressure for hit singles and the endless lineup changes caused by Willows’s
unpredictable, controlling and caustic temperament. No fewer than ten
musicians passed through the band in twelve years.
Kat read a dozen pages of text, printed in a small font, to get some idea
of what a handful, or serious narcissist, Tony Willows had been. More
enlightened critical hindsight suggested that a personality disorder, or
mental illness, had reflected the dark side of his musical genius.
The biography also detailed the committal of an oboe player during a
tour of Germany in 1974 and the tragic death by electrocution of the
beautiful fiddler, and Willows’s lover at that time, Agnes Crown, also in
1974.
Heavy and continual use of psychedelic drugs, violent mood swings and
hallucinations, even on stage, plagued Tony’s life from 1972 to 1978. His
unpredictability and antics onstage forged part of the band’s appeal to their
fans.
Mandrax had been the drug of choice from 1972 . . . During a final
Witchfinder Apprentice tour in 1978, cancelled after five dates, Willows was
taken into psychiatric care. He discharged himself and fled to the

farmhouse he’d purchased the same year in a remote area of South
Devon . . .
A female member of the band’s entourage, Jessica Usher, accompanied
Willows to Redstone. Since her appearance in Tony’s life in 1974, they’d
become inseparable. This member of the Witchfinder Apprentice entourage,
or ‘groupie’, had long been cited by band members as a divisive influence
within the outfit . . . Her status as a Clear in Scientology, was cited as part
of Usher’s influence over Tony. They never married but had twins after the
band broke up . . .
One low profile solo album was later released by Willows on an indie
label, recorded in 1986 at his home studio at Redstone Farm. But the rock
stylings of Witchfinder Apprentice records were erased from the solo effort.
The album marked a complete return to traditional acoustic instruments
and an emphasis on woodwind.
There was no mention of festivals on his land but there was a link to the
news story of the death of a young woman, Maddy Gross, in 1979. Kat had
already read that story: Gross had been a guest at Tony’s home and there
was no official resolution to the mysterious circumstances that surrounded
the discovery of her body on the edge of his land, though toxicology tests
had detected high levels of illegal substances in her system. She’d died of
heart failure. Tony was convicted of drug possession and manslaughter and
served four years of a ten-year sentence. He was released in late 1984.
Maybe the girl’s death was an indication that Tony’s old habits had died
hard. Maybe the incident had even called time on his rock-and-roll lifestyle
and career. He’d never toured after 1978 and, following the release of the
solo album, completely abandoned professional music in favour of
horticulture, agriculture and animal husbandry. That much Kat already
knew, but better understood why Steve had been fascinated with the man
and thrilled by his close proximity to where they lived.
Beyond cover versions and remastered releases of Witchfinder
Apprentice records in a box-set there was little recent news concerning
Willows. A site dedicated to the music of Witchfinder Apprentice’s longest
serving musician, the mandolin player Ade ‘Rhymer’ Lankin, did mention
how Willows was hounded by fans of their early albums for years after
they’d broken up. People often made the long trip to Willows's farm to
catch sight of the musician or to get their albums signed. Apparently they
were given short shrift by his family. The last time Ade Lankin and Tony

Willows had any contact was in 1986. Lankin had played mandolin and
contributed vocals to Willows’s only solo album.
Anxiety overran Kat’s mind at 9.30 p.m.
She called Sheila at home, something she’d never done before. As soon
as Sheila picked up, Kat became conscious of how thin and breathless her
own voice sounded.
‘Still not shown up?’ Sheila asked, while trying to mask her uninterest,
or was it annoyance now? ‘Well, I’m not surprised you’re worried. Afraid
I’ve not heard a thing, dear. Let me chase Lewis and I’ll get back to you.’
After that, Kat was left to the four walls of her cottage for another hour.
Fear gnawing at her raw nerves in a suffocating silence, she remained on
the sofa, nursing a lukewarm cup of coffee, watching her screens.
Breathless with panic, Steve’s mother finally called at 10.30, which did
nothing for Kat’s nerves either. When Kat claimed she still hadn’t heard
from Steve, Delia hung up without another word. The role of Steve’s
girlfriend seemed inconsequential to his mother.
Kat’s second attempt to contact Sheila soon after that was met with a
recorded voicemail message.
While trying to distract herself with the BBC news and recurring
thoughts of cold white wine, the first red face appeared at the window
closest to where Kat sat.

16
Tapping on the glass. That came first. And for reasons Kat later attributed to
wishful thinking, she imagined that Steve was outside her home knocking
on a window. By then he was all she could think about.
This desire for an external sign to end the terrible wait for her boyfriend
compelled her to draw the curtain back from the window.
Before she had an opportunity to regret her haste, she was staring into
the primitive face of an adult man. The first feature to claim her attention
was the intruder’s eyes. They were mean: the sclera yoke-yellow, traversed
by blood vessels. From under the crusting thickets of the brows his glare
bulged: as clear an expression of instability and rage as she’d ever seen.
Pugnacious, leering, a brutish face from times long past. Her sole reaction a
sharp intake of breath.
The smeared figure had pressed itself against the window. When he
removed the stained palms of each hand from the pane of glass, she saw
him more clearly: pot-bellied, flabby-chested, bearded, balding, entirely
naked, a stub of purplish genital evident in a scarlet scrub of pubic hair.
The figure stepped backwards into total darkness leaving Kat with a
reflection of her own slack face and horrified eyes.
She fell from the sofa where she’d been kneeling, scrabbled to her feet,
barking her shin on the side table and sending a coffee mug and three
remote controls clattering across the floorboards.
Through tear-blurred eyes she could just make out the phone. Picked it
up in hands that shook and struggled to grip the sides of the smooth device.
Tried to unlock the screen. Password Incorrect.
Get out! Car! Do it outside! Without hesitation, she scraped the catch
from the rear of the front entrance, unlocked it by Yale key, twisted the
mortise lock and yanked the door open.
Similar in position and posture to an eager cat on her doormat, the effigy
of an entirely different beast awaited upon the threshold. Crude head erect
and demanding her full attention, the muzzled and spiky-eared statuette cast
its fierce gaze upwards.

A mere glance at the thing illumined under the porch light was sufficient
to identify the onyx curves about its full breasts, the splay of rounded hips,
the glimmer of glazed clay. Unlike the Venus figures she’d seen at the
museum exhibition this one retained arms and a head: shaggy, sticklike
appendages resembling a dog’s forelegs. A spear spiked from the
culmination of one limb.
Standing in socks, without a coat, Kat felt the cold night air pass through
her skin to shiver her marrow. But brutal naked red things, with their
wretched stone idols, could withstand temperatures and commit acts that
she’d only wither before: instinct wasted no time informing her of this. She
couldn’t recall the last time she’d felt as vulnerable and unprotected.
Pitch darkness in the village lane. No streetlights this far out. The only
light was spot-cast from the five cottages in Kiln Lane: yellow shards
peeking between chinks of drapes and the two dim orbs of exterior lamps.
After London, the silence and darkness out here had taken some getting
used to. Kat no longer thought about it much but was now reminded of the
void that surrounded her home at night. She was also forced to consider
what ran through it in the manner of wild dogs.
In a heartbeat she acknowledged another disadvantage of rural living:
how darkness could cloak a figure standing mere feet from you.
Three forms rose from the ground and made haste for her front door.
One wheeled from behind the front hedge. It skittered on bandy legs, its feet
sandalled: a woman with tatty hair clawed into short, wet-looking sprouts.
Her face was a vision from Bedlam.
A short, stocky man appeared beside the porch post, his teeth flashing
white, the grin malevolent. His knees made a sound similar to snapping
celery.
The third visitor ran at speed from across the lane, straight at her door.
When he came within reach of the porch light, he revealed a wispy beard
trailing over shoulders with the lustre of sunburned skin. An object made
from bone hung from his neck.
All were daubed red from head to foot. They wouldn’t have looked
amiss in the Brickburgh Caves, scrabbling through the damp darkness forty
thousand years gone. Each clutched a pointed black stone. Hand-axes.
Kat closed the door and secured the mortise lock again at the same
moment as a fist thudded against wood and shook the cottage. Pressing her
back into the door she tried to control her jerking arms and hands. Investing

what concentration she still had, she pressed a fingertip to the phone’s
screen and inputted two of the required four digits, this time in the right
sequence.
Whenever she was downstairs and Steve used the tiny bathroom
upstairs, the floorboards always cracked and ground together. Sitting below
was not unlike being inside the hold of a sailing ship. Above her head, the
floor upstairs now groaned in this familiar manner to indicate the presence
of the uninvited within her home.
They were inside. They were here the whole time.
Across the tiny upstairs landing someone strode eagerly. Up there, signs
of the desire to get downstairs with her became even more pronounced
when a red hand gripped the upper newel post and made it creak.
How did they get in? No windows were broken, no doors. No one had a
key . . . except Steve.
Panic enabled Kat to flee into the kitchen. Dizziness made the yellow
cupboards swing nauseously through her vision. Her lower back pressed
against the cooker. She typed the next two digits of the phone’s password.
Password Incorrect.
When a pair of red legs became visible on the staircase, Kat screamed,
‘Get out!’
Between the banisters, slender calves and naked feet stepped carefully
down from the darkness. A woman. One who paused under the hallway
light for an interminable moment and revealed how a pair of pretty blue
eyes in a thin face could be deranged by suppressed fury. The loathing
projected by those eyes paralysed Kat.
The intruder turned her head and issued a short, high-pitched sound, one
that warbled and tailed into a yip: a cry more animal than human. She then
turned and with one slim arm opened the front door to let the others inside.

17
Helene ended the call and sat in silence. The Game of Thrones episode
finished without her noticing. On-screen, a group of women in another
show were shouting at each other. She turned the TV off and refilled her
wine glass.
The contact had been unexpected, as was the information she’d received.
According to the call register, Kat, the journalist whom she’d met in Devon,
had also called twice earlier when Helene had been reading The Little Grey
Men to Valda.
Her daughter was still awake and was animating soft toys on her duvet;
through the ceiling of the living room Helene heard the muted voices Valda
attributed to each character.
If Kat had called three times then what she had to say was important.
But what exactly had Kat just relayed to her during the third call that
Helene had managed to pick up?
The entire communication remained vague because of the enigma of its
contents. But Kat had alluded to the fact that she had come into some
information about Helene’s brother Lincoln. News pertinent to the time that
he’d spent in South Devon during his final summer alive.
Prior to this revelation, Kat had issued a caveat: that she’d been reluctant
to call Helene because she didn’t want to upset her. Kat had also judged an
email to be too ‘cold’: that’s what she’d said. ‘It’s best that we talk about
this.’
Information; Kat had received information about Lincoln. ‘Trust me,’
Kat had said. ‘You really need to come down and see this for yourself.’ The
journalist claimed that she’d met people whom Helene ‘should definitely
speak to about Lincoln. People he met while he was here.’
So if she’d correctly understood Kat, then the journalist had somehow
located people who’d been with her brother near the end of his life. Only
she’d omitted to explain how she found these people, or who they were, or
anything about the information they possessed about Lincoln. She’d only
mentioned that they were ‘local people your brother stayed with’.

This was more than Helene had hoped for when she’d travelled to
Divilmouth alone. But it now appeared that her chance encounter with the
journalist and photographer in the museum café would lead to something
far more meaningful. From these locals she might learn how Lincoln had
seemed at the end: she might even solve the mystery of what had troubled
her little brother enough for him to take his own life. Helene still had no
idea where he’d camped or slept during his last two weeks in Devon.
She was only just coming up for air from an exhaustion of delayed grief
that had accompanied her home from the trip to Devon, but if Kat had
found people who had known her brother, then another trip was worth the
risk of getting upset again.
Only work and the relentless intensity of motherhood, after returning
home from Divilmouth, had prevented her from taking to her bed and not
getting up for a while. The trip had upset her in ways she couldn’t fully
define. But she’d been left with a lingering, almost psychic sense that her
brother had somehow been engulfed, psychologically, by that unforgiving
and hostile landscape, a place crowded with unpleasant echoes from
prehistory. At times, when she’d been down there, she’d even felt as if his
spirit had been passing through her body.
Kat had also confided that she’d ‘sensed how unhappy’ Helene had been
when they met. Helene was flooded with a clear sense of Kat’s experience
and maturity and her kind-heartedness. No one had done anything like this
for her in her life. Kat had clearly taken a keen interest in her brother’s
tragedy and had wanted to help a grieving woman find some resolution.
Oddly, Kat had seemed emotional on the phone. There had been a
tremor in her voice, a frailty Helene had not heard when they’d met. This
tone had prompted her to ask if the news about Lincoln was bad. Kat had
said, ‘Not at all.’
Helene stared at the phone number of the guesthouse that Kat had told
her about: a place where she could stay free of charge. ‘My friends own a
guesthouse, the Red Barn. They’re happy to offer you a place to stay while
you’re here.’ That was just as well as Helene would struggle to find the
money to pay for another trip south. She would call the number of the B&B
in the morning. Maybe she could even make another trip this coming
weekend as Kat had suggested she should. Kat would be covering a local
festival on the Saturday in Redhill and had suggested they meet there.

But Valda? How she’d pined for her mother the last time Helene had left
home: the only time they’d ever been apart. That had only been for three
days. Her mother had cared for Valda while she’d been away but there had
been tears and many questions: Is Mummy coming back? Is that Mummy?
(every time the front doorbell chimed). I’m starving for Mummy.
Taking Valda with her was out of the question. It wouldn’t be practical:
she didn’t want Valda to see her upset and the drive was too long. Forget it.
The journey would also have to be undertaken twice in two days.
Valda wouldn’t understand why her mum wanted to go away again:
she’d never known her uncle. All the same, Helene needed to go back.
Before she called her mother to ask for childcare cover at the weekend,
she dug Lincoln’s box of recordings out of the garage. Kat had asked her to
bring the discs, almost insisting that she didn’t forget them and that they
were ‘important’. The journalist had also stressed that the recordings would
‘make sense now’. An odd thing to say but if the recordings helped her
understand anything about Lincoln at the end of his short life, then Helene
would take them.

18
The large creature spotted Helene. The very moment she appeared its
shaggy black face turned towards her, the muzzle rising as if to inhale her
scent. Having selected her from the herd it hobbled at her, moving like an
arthritic animal. When the fraying edge of the crowd, at the mouth of the
village festival, parted to let the creature lumber through, Helene raised a
hand to ward off the attentions of the ungainly, grotesque form. The lumpy
body was coated in dirty black wool to its four feet.
Even as it closed on her, the features of the thing’s head remained
indistinct. Until, up closer, a pair of wooden jaws clacked like clogs below
big, white eyes: rolling, rattling, lunatic orbs that bulged from ragged
sockets in the creature’s mangy head.
The disagreeable mouth momentarily engulfed her head as if the thing
intended to decapitate her. An odour of mildewed fabric and old gym
equipment in a primary school filled her sinuses. Inside the open mouth,
between rows of yellow teeth carven from painted wood, sat an oafish male
face, sheened with sweat. The man’s breath reeked of cider and tobacco and
he was grinning with the delinquent pleasure that pranking a stranger gave
him. Helene had difficulty returning his enthusiasm. He was trying to make
a fool of her in public.
The creature reared back, releasing her head. After an ungainly
manoeuvre on the tarmac of the road that resembled a big hound turning in
too small a space, the thing shuffled around her in a circle. But her nose
remained filled with the odours of dust and vintage sweat, a miasma that
now trailed from the wretched hide and its fetid innards.
She wasn’t sure what it was supposed to be: a thing that suggested a bull
or cow, horse or dog. She only wished that it would go away.
The shabby four-legged figure might even suggest a grotesque vestige
from another, much older era: a mythical beast from the Middle Ages, or
even possessing origins in Middle Earth. Grinning people in the street
seemed intent on filming it and taking selfies beside its mad, hairy face.

‘Don’t worry luv, won’t bite!’ a man shouted from a crowd that both
filled the pub’s beer garden and spilled out to encircle a low stone wall. A
woman issued a hag-laugh, her throat coarsened by cigarettes.
The shambling animal effigy would have made Valda wail. Even though
two men were clearly inside the costume, Helene didn’t like being near it
herself: a threadbare pantomime horse with the face of a devil. Instead of
hooves, the creature’s feet were two pairs of dirty trainers that clumsily
pranced about.
Bedraggled and sinister and parting the crowd, the thing finally stomped
away, down the lane. Dodging about like a Chinese dragon, undulating and
excitable, it eventually sagged amidst the revellers’ heads and vanished.
If this beast-puppet was a local tradition, why revive it? She couldn’t
imagine children appreciating its presence at all.
The raucous voices from the pub were soon obliterated by a local jazz
band’s brassy rendition of a Glenn Miller song. Bombarded on every side
with noise, colour, motion, raised voices, Helene’s entrance to the fête
continued to disorient her.
A few hundred people had gathered at Redhill and milled in the main
road that forked up and down a hill. The pub, the streetlights, the stage, the
church and the community centre were all edged with red, white and blue
bunting.
From a cursory inspection of the stalls lining each side of the lane, she
learned that the mascot character was called ‘Creel’. It was well known
locally; there was plenty of merchandise featuring the creature’s image, but
none of it indicated what kind of an animal Creel was. Where it was
depicted as a cartoon, it resembled a dog with a cat’s face, a permanently
leering hound-thing equipped with mad eyes and a looping tongue. ‘Yip
yip!’ it said on banners, decals and printed shirts. ‘I buy my meat local!’
When printed, it regularly sported clothes in the colours of the Devon
flag or the Union Jack. The animal was even depicted on some shirts
wearing a top hat and monocle. A set of coffee mugs showed an image of
Creel wiping its clawed feet, and worse, on the European flag.
A new irritation replaced Helene’s last when a barking, amplified voice
impacted against her ears, hurting them inside.
Before the Tudor-styled pub, The Red Sky, and the fête’s thumping
heart, a man stood on a temporary stage and roared into a microphone. The
spanking, metallic sounds issuing from his flabby mouth were broadcast

through speakers fixed to aluminium posts. The wheezy static of the
speaker’s inhalations rasped between his words.
The MC was a purple-faced drinker with a ponderous belly who
continually wiped sweat from his bilious jowls. But most of the
aggressively jolly, burly figure’s rant was impossible to discern. Helene
only caught snatches:
‘Tradition and fam’ly! . . . ’sall about, innit . . . been goin’ four hundred
years, if you can believe that! . . . She’s on her way up from Dillmuth right
now! . . . Forty-stone boar! . . . All proceeds go to chariteeeee! Ssssso dig
deep when the time comes, ladies and gentlemen . . . fink of a few people
we’d like to roast ’ere instead, aye!'
A line of bewildered elderly ex-servicemen wearing berets stood before
the stage. Their seemingly oversized or nearly empty blazers were
festooned with ribbons and medals. They lined up before the ranting face
like a Praetorian guard that had not been dismissed in decades. Each man
held a plastic charity box.
A squeal of feedback pierced the air and a baby howled. Helene walked
on. She’d imagined her Saturday afternoon might have been spent outside a
quiet village pub in the company of Kat and the people her brother had
known.
She walked the length of the narrow lane and back again, checking the
stalls: home-baked cakes, sweets, an ice-cream van, barbecue, handmade
toys, cider in clay jugs, a Land Trust Countryside Membership table, dated
souvenirs. Her browse lasted five minutes.
All about her, the people were loudly and assertively happy, though
Helene sensed a taut wire of defiance in the gathering too. An angry, tipsy
energy bustled in places, particularly near the pub. She didn’t know where
the ire was directed but suspected she’d walked into a community forcing a
confirmation of its identity: an idea of itself based on what it knew of the
past, or had even lived through but only selectively remembered.
Maybe she was detecting aspects of that familiar, depressing workingclass nationalism: like at home, where a community orbited hard times and
found itself baited and antagonised by low wages, unemployment, benefit
cuts and a drinking culture.
From window sills and wooden poles a dozen Cross of St George flags
drooped in the warm air. Limp banners that gave the gathering a strange,

perhaps unintended political flavour. In Brickburgh Harbour people seemed
keen on flags too.
In the street beyond the pub, pushchairs and elderly people crowded, and
after the briefest attention from the drinkers and Creel, the presence of the
young and old reassured her, as did the fragrance of candy floss and burgers
on grills. Though the sight of so many children created a pang in her
stomach and her throat involuntarily thickened. From one of the Nans
who’d set out a stall in the pub carpark, Helene bought a bag of fruit jellies
for Valda.
She checked her phone. No reply from Kat. She’d texted, ‘I’m here’
from outside the festival entrance.
Getting away from the street and the ominous return of Creel, Helene
stepped into a shadowed passage between the community centre and
Methodist chapel. She entered a small park.
Set up on the grass, other attractions sheltered from the hot sun under
plastic canopies. The close, moist, beery atmosphere of the main street
immediately surrendered to a bigger sky, the heat in the park less
oppressive. Breathing became easier and the clamminess between her
shoulder blades vanished. The infernal jabber of the man with the
microphone dulled to a distant tinny garble, his chesty roars and rasps
contained by the old stone houses. The last thing he’d barked, with
provocative eagerness, as if proud of his skill to shock, was something
about ‘roasting a big pig!’
In the park, an elderly magician in a battered suit tugged bright chiffon
tissues from a sleeve. At the end of a chain of sheer fabric that appeared
incongruous between his withered hands came an explosion of Haribo party
bags that showered the kneeling children. They fell to the ground at once
and commenced scrabbling as if an aid truck had just made a drop in a
refugee camp.
The little ones won’t get any sweets. That blonde girl is about to cry.
You’ll get upset too.
Valda would have stood and watched the scrum, infuriated by any
evidence of snatching or unfairness. And as Valda grew older, Helene often
wondered if she’d brought her daughter up purely to be torn apart in a
world content with a permanent state of unfairness and inequality.
A sharp smell of wood and sawdust soaked by urine stung her nose,
distracting her from the magician. Beside the tired playground equipment, a

circle of hay bales was arranged about a tier of small cages. Sitting upon the
straw cubes, children stroked rabbits and guinea pigs, the animals handed
out and passed around by two women in red polo shirts. Valda would have
loved that part and Helene sensed a ghost-child swinging on her arm,
pulling her towards the little candy-striped tent labelled ‘Make Your Own
Teddy Bear’. She’d make one later and take it home.
Her phone buzzed, vibrating in the palm of her hand. Kat. A text
message: Burrow Street too busy. I’m in park near bonfire.
Shielding her eyes with one hand, Helene peered about the grass until
she located a triangular pyre of wood, set between an area cordoned off for
a firework display and a long queue outside two lopsided portable toilets.
She saw Kat, sitting on a bench.
A man and woman stood behind her. The man’s hands were folded over
the back of the bench, close to Kat’s shoulders. He was heavily bearded, the
woman slight and elderly. She wore sunglasses and her hair was covered by
a head scarf as if she were undergoing treatment for cancer. The couple’s
unsmiling faces were directed at Helene.
As she drew closer, the couple moved away, in the direction of the main
street.
Helene couldn’t see Steve anywhere. She’d assumed he’d be here to take
photographs but she didn’t dwell on his absence because of her shock at the
unexpected change in Kat’s demeanour and appearance. The reserved,
confident lifestyle journalist seemed to have been replaced by someone
else. Helene recalled the tremor in Kat’s voice on the phone.
‘Kat. Hi.’ Kat’s handshake was weaker, her soft hand trembling in
Helene’s grasp. She was much paler as if ill. Even her bottom lip quivered
when Helene asked, ‘Steve taking pictures? I never saw him in the street.’
‘No. Not today,’ Kat replied and so quietly that her words qualified as a
whisper. Her eyes, or what Helene could see of them around Kat’s Dior
sunglasses, moved so slowly that she might have been drugged. Aware of
Helene’s scrutiny, Kat moved her head to keep her eyes hidden.
How are you? Good journey? How’s Valda? Yes, good, I’m pleased to
hear that. Have you been keeping well? Work okay? Good. Good. Good.
Kat’s words came out slowly and were muttered without feeling or
enthusiasm as if she were reading from a card.
Helene answered the questions, though Kat began repeating herself
without realising she’d done so. She didn’t listen to Helene’s answers either.

It dawned on her that Kat must be terrified of upsetting her. Maybe she’d
learned something terrible about Lincoln that she was afraid to share in case
Helene broke down.
‘Are you all right, Kat?’ Helene eventually ventured when Kat could no
longer concentrate on the stilted, failing conversation. She wasn’t even
looking at Helene: her eyes had drifted to the distance, her thoughts no
doubt preceding her gaze.
‘Yes. Yes. All good,’ Kat replied after an awkward pause.
They then sat together in silence for longer than seemed bearable and
Helene felt the first scorch of impatience behind her sternum. ‘May I ask
where they are?’
Kat turned to her. ‘Who?’
‘The people you wanted me to meet. Who Lincoln knew down here.’
She wondered if they had been the couple behind the bench.
‘Working. They’re working.’
Then what the fuck am I doing here? I’ve driven half the day to get here
and left my bloody daughter in tears.
‘But they’ll see you later,’ Kat added. She smiled weakly, her halfhidden eyes anxious. And then Kat reached out a hand and placed it upon
the back of Helene’s. The contact was feeble and the hand was retracted a
moment after it was offered.
‘Is it serious then?’
‘What?’ Kat said.
‘What they have to tell me? You know, about Lincoln, my brother.’ She
felt the need to add her brother’s name to the sentence because Kat seemed
oblivious to the topic of conversation.
Kat’s mouth sagged. The expression made her appear much older than
she was, as if she’d been forced to remember something terrible. ‘Lincoln?
No. No.’
‘Because if it is, you don’t need to feel bad, Kat. I just want to know
anything they can tell me about him. You know, from before the end. That’s
all. I’m a big girl with broad shoulders.’
‘From the swimming. All your swimming.’
Kat’s distress and preoccupation soon reminded Helene of visits she’d
made to an elderly grandmother: the faint voice, distracted expression, an
inability to concentrate or connect with whoever sat beside her, the struggle
to even smile.

‘Shall we get a drink, Kat? Though maybe not in that pub.’
Kat seemed to pale further at the suggestion. ‘I’m not allowed,’ she said,
as if without forethought. ‘Working. I’m working here.’
Helene shrugged. ‘Soft drink?’
‘I’m okay, thank you.’
‘Forgive me for saying so, Kat, but I’ve come a long way and I came
straight here from the motorway. I was under the impression that I was
going to meet the people who knew something about Lincoln. That’s what
you said on the phone. It’s why I came to the fair. But you seem . . .’
‘Oh, don’t worry. Soon. That . . . they . . . will be here soon.’
‘But it was really important that I came. You said that.’
Kat swallowed again. Her hands knotted white within the lap of her
jeans. ‘You brought the discs?’
‘Yes. But these people? I’d like to establish when I can meet them. It
wasn’t easy for me to get away at such short notice.’
‘Yes. Yes. Of course.’ Kat was now looking past Helene again and into
the distance. And God how her mouth was drawn. There was a long stain on
her blouse too. It looked like coffee. Had Kat not noticed that? She hadn’t
put herself together very well: no makeup, she’d barely touched her hair.
Something was wrong. Helene really wished that Steve was here; he
wouldn’t have been short of something to say.
‘So, maybe later,’ Helene prompted, ‘I was thinking that you, me and
Steve could grab a bite to eat. If you’re both free?’
A visible shudder passed through Kat as if she’d been pricked by
internal pain. Yes, she was actually crying too. Kat slipped a finger behind
her glasses to touch an eye. ‘I’m not . . . We’re not . . . Steve . . . not seeing
each other any more.’
‘Oh, God, Kat. I’m sorry. You broke up? I didn’t know. I’m sorry.’ That
would provide something of an explanation for Kat’s behaviour and
appearance. The woman was shattered, cut up. ‘You sure I can’t get you a
drink? I think we could both use one. Who’s ever going to find out?’
‘Love to.’ Kat swallowed to regain control of her voice. ‘But I can’t. I’m
in recovery.’
‘Oh, shit. Sorry. I didn’t –’
‘Could I have the discs?’ Kat said, while looking at her own bloodless
hands.
‘Sure.’ Helene took her bag from her shoulder.

‘It’s very important,’ Kat whispered. ‘They . . .’
‘I don’t know what these recordings have to do with anything, so can
you at least tell me how they come into this?’ Helene wasn’t keen on
hearing them again.
‘The magazine. We’d like to use them.’ Kat said in the same vague, noncommittal manner she’d displayed since Helene arrived.
‘I don’t have copies, Kat. I didn’t get a chance to make a copy.’
‘Good. That’s good.’
‘What is?’
Kat looked flustered for a moment. ‘That you brought them. This will
help.’
Helene had given up any hope of getting any sense out of the woman but
experienced an unexpected tug of attachment to the discs. They had
Lincoln’s handwriting upon the shiny surfaces and the titles might have
been the last thing he’d ever written. ‘I don’t want to lose these. They’re the
last things he ever made.’
One of Kat’s trembling hands reached forcefully toward the discs in
Helene’s hand, making Helene think of an addict reaching for its junk or a
beggar snatching at change. She moved her body to put the discs out of
Kat’s reach. ‘So, I’ll tell you what I’ll do. I’ll copy them. I’ve brought my
laptop –’
‘No! No need. I can take them now.’
‘It’s better I copy them. I’ll do it at the B&B, which reminds me, I better
check in. They said to come by three and it’s nearly that now. I’ll upload
them to a transfer site and you can download them.’
A quiver crossed Kat’s mouth and her words tumbled out breathlessly.
‘Oh, no, don’t copy them. No. No need. I can take them and return them
later.’
Kat's grasping and eager, bloodless face was really starting to make her
anxious.. Her half-hidden eyes mooned wide behind the tinted lenses as if
with fear.
Only a concern that she’d never see the CDs again compelled Helene to
further resist the journalist’s clutching hands. ‘I’d rather make the copies,
Kat. If that’s all right with you. These have sentimental value.’
Kat’s posture stiffened. ‘The Red Barn. You’ll have them there?’
This meeting was going nowhere. ‘Er, I guess so. I better get there now.’
‘And you’ll wait.’

‘Sorry?’
‘I’ll call you and we can meet.’ Kat noisily cleared her throat. ‘I’ll make
the introductions.’
‘With the people who knew Lincoln?’
‘Of course. You’ll definitely be there, won’t you, at the hotel?’
Helene couldn’t restrain her sarcasm a moment longer. ‘Well, I guess so,
Kat, as I have nowhere else to be. I’m really sorry to hear about Steve, and
this is clearly not a good time for you, but I’ve moved mountains to get here
and my daughter was very upset the last time I left her. I can’t just motor up
and down between Walsall and Devon at the drop of a hat.’
Kat dipped her head and Helene could see how her hands were gripping
the edge of the bench. The woman might have been trying to hold herself
upright.
It was time to leave. Breakup or not, she was getting close to losing it
with the journalist: the long drive, an hour’s holdup at Bristol, with the
constantly recurring memory of Valda’s tear-streaked face haunting the
entire journey, had done nothing to improve her mood. ‘I need to get one of
those bears made up and then I need to check in, yeah?’ Helene stuffed the
discs inside her shoulder bag and stood up.
Kat looked bewildered. ‘You’re going now?’
Kat had to be on something. Probably tranqs. ‘That’s right, Kat. I just
told you . . . Never mind. But I’ll hear from you later? I need to take off by
ten tomorrow. Maybe you could give me the names and numbers of these
people so I can contact them myself. You know, in case you’re not feeling
up to it later.’
‘I’ll call. I promise.’
‘Okay. Until then.’ Helene walked off with more purpose than when
she’d entered the fête.
From the distance, the red-faced orator belted out fresh information
about the arrival of a dead pig on a truck.
Inside the stifling teddy-bear tent, Helene created a toy for Valda. She
chose a rabbit and stuffed the furry skin with foam, then covered the bunny
in a pink dress. While doing so, she noticed that a Creel toy was available,
but again, neither the empty skins nor the stuffed sample hanging from the
roof indicated what the animal was supposed to be. As Helene paid the
woman who ran the stall, she asked, ‘What is this Creel thing?’

The woman shrugged. ‘I’m not from here. I came over from Torbay. But
it’s something from a story, like a legend, I think. A monster.’
It certainly was one of those.
‘They was on the walls of that cave, I think. People is using it on
souvenirs now. Been really popular too. I’ve nearly run out.’ The woman
dropped her voice to a whisper. ‘Not the sort of thing a child would want
sitting on its bed, I’d have thought.’
Before she left the little park and re-entered the street, Helene looked to
where she’d left Kat. The journalist remained seated on the bench but the
bearded man and the woman in the headscarf had rejoined her. The old
woman’s face was lowered close to Kat’s to whisper into her ear. And if she
wasn’t mistaken, Kat had covered her face with her hands. Maybe that was
Kat’s mum, comforting her after splitting up with her boyfriend.
A blurt from the speakers, an amplified roar from the MC twisted her
nerves anew. A rattle of applause and the crowd’s murmur spiked with
excited shrieks.
Helene looked to the main street and saw a large flatbed truck slowly
shake and wheeze between the buildings, parting the crowd to bump over
the grass.
The vehicle parked beside the dormant bonfire pyre. About the truck’s
cabin a row of red faces grinned their white teeth and waved at the crowd.
The people on the back of the truck were dressed in furry loincloths and
bikinis, their exposed skin daubed red. Two figures, arranged on mock
thrones like a king and queen, wore what looked like black Creel masks to
hide their faces.
In the middle of the flatbed, a pale carcass lay upon a wooden box.
Presumably this was the huge pig the MC had been ranting about, soon to
be roasted and offered up to the gathering.
Helene made haste for her car.

19
During the lengthy wait for Kat’s call, Helene had phoned her mum and the
report was good. ‘She actually went to bed at seven thirty?’
‘She did. I think she liked showing me her routines and her pyjamas. But
she’s still awake. I can hear her talking to that pink fish she’s got up there.’
Helene laughed. ‘It’s a dolphin. Splashy.’
‘That’s the one.’
‘Thanks, Mom, for putting my mind at rest. I better ring off. I’m still
waiting for Kat to call. As I’ve come all this way I don’t want to miss it
now. But I’m getting a bit fed up.’
‘Well, I can’t see why she couldn’t have told you what she knows on the
phone.’
Helene had done more than wonder about that too. ‘I thought these
people might have pictures. Or they’d take me somewhere Lincoln had
been. I don’t know what I was expecting. But I’ll say cheerio, Mom.’
‘Oh, one last thing, luv. I saw you had one of those red cards from the
postie so I picked up a parcel from the sorting office today when I was up
the shops. I let Valda open it. Hope that’s all right?’
‘She usually opens everything. Was it the hair straighteners from
Amazon?’
‘No. This parcel was addressed to Valda. But I’m not sure it was meant
for her. That’s the odd bit and I don’t know what to make of the bloody
thing. It’s not the sort of present that I’d send to a child. I can’t say as I
could tell you what it is. It’s an ornament, I think. A horrible-looking thing
with a spear.’
‘What?’
‘I can’t tell what it’s supposed to be and it’s a bit primitive-looking, like
it’s very old. You know, like something they find in those old tombs. It’s got a
human body and that’s a bit suggestive too. I mean it’s got these big . . . a
bosom.’ Helene’s mother laughed. ‘But like a dog’s head on top.’
Helene felt a sudden urge to get herself home. The object that had been
addressed to her daughter by name sounded very much like what she’d

recently seen at the Brickburgh Cave exhibition and subsequently learned
was the inspiration for the loathsome Creel character at the festival. Why
would a replica, if that was what this thing was, have been sent to her
daughter? And by who? Kat?
‘No sender’s address?’
‘Nothing.’
Helene could only presume that Kat, in her mentally unsound state of
mind, had thought the figure was a suitable gift for a child, or some sort of
gesture commemorating how they’d met. But it didn’t take much thought
for either of those explanations to fail to convince her. Kat wasn’t clueless.
Heartbroken for sure but that wasn’t sufficient cause for her to send Valda a
dog-headed ornament with big tits.
‘No card inside either,’ her mum said. ‘It was in a little box and all
covered in bubble-wrap. I didn’t know what to do with it. V’s been playing
with it but I’m not sure how valuable it is, so I took it off her.’
‘Okay. Keep it off her until I get back.’
‘That’s what I thought.’
Helene’s phone pinged in her ear. She checked the screen: an incoming
call from Kat. Stress creased her mind. ‘Mom, that call’s just come in. Gotta
put you on hold.’ Helene picked up the new call. ‘Kat?’
Kat’s sniff broke the silence. She was crying. Her shaky voice eventually
said, ‘Sorry.’ One word, spoken softly before she ended the call.
‘Hang on.’ Helene tried to redial Kat’s number. To add to her confusion,
the landline phone beside the bed buzzed. Helene dithered. She still had her
mum on hold and Kat wasn’t picking up.
Sorry. From that one word from Kat, was Helene to deduce that the
evening’s meeting was cancelled?
Helene picked up the room phone. ‘Hello?’
‘It’s Carol, in reception. They’re down here, waiting.’
‘Who is?’
Did Carol mean the people that Kat wanted her to meet? So had Kat just
called her to say that she couldn’t make it but the others were available?
‘Sorry, Carol, who is waiting?’
Carol ended the call.
‘What the . . .?’ Helene reopened the call to her mother. ‘Mom, gotta fly.
Someone’s downstairs. I think it’s the people I’m supposed to meet.’ They
hurried their goodbyes.

Once she’d had a moment to consider the two incoming calls Helen
guessed that if the visitors were the people that Lincoln had known, then
maybe Kat might be with them after all. The solitary ‘Sorry’ on the phone
might have been an apology for being so late.
There’d be no time now to go out and eat. But surely her brother’s
acquaintances wouldn’t just show up at the Red Barn? They didn’t know
her. At the festival Kat had said they’d been working during the day.
Confused and irritable, Helene left her room. From the staircase she
could see the ground-floor hallway. It was empty.
The lounge doubled as a dining room and was also deserted. The front
door was open but no one stood in the porch. Damp air drifted into the
building carrying a vague scent of manure. Beyond the porch, the blue ink
of early night pressed the land and chilled the air.
Helene peered out of the entrance. Only her car was parked on the
forecourt. She walked to the reception desk and dinged the bell. ‘Hello?
Carol?’
Earlier, Carol had been civil with Helene, or courteously uninterested,
and had discouraged any conversation beyond stilted small talk. Being in
receipt of a stranger’s charity had made Helene feel awkward, so when
she’d collected the keys she’d mentioned the reason for her visit and
thanked Carol for her kindness.
Carol had merely considered her with blank indifference or even
irritation. A reaction that had also suggested she didn’t know Kat. So
perhaps the journalist was owed a favour through the magazine and Carol
was a contact as opposed to a friend? Helene didn’t know, but ever since
she’d arrived, the situation had grown weirder and more frustrating by the
hour.
‘Hello, Carol?’ Helene repeated over the reception counter.
‘They’re here for you.’ That was Carol’s voice in the room behind the
reception counter, situated to the side of the desk.
Helene leaned over the front desk and peered in the direction of Carol’s
voice. ‘Sorry, who is?’
Through an open door a kitchen became visible. Carol was preparing
food with her back to the entrance. Helene recognised the thin shoulders
and the small birdlike frame topped by a functional bob of thick grey hair.
‘Sorry, Carol, no one seems to be here. Carol?’

When Carol turned around, Helene understood even less about why
she’d been called downstairs but she also wished that Carol had remained
facing forwards. The sight of her was a shock because the woman had
painted her face red, a bright blood-red from lined forehead to grooved
chin.
Was she injured? But then, did people in pain grin to reveal oversized
teeth amidst the stained scarlet flesh of their mouths? The incongruity of the
red skin amidst the hood of grey hair appeared especially fiendish:
grotesque in contrast to the woman’s ordinary clothing, the brown trousers
and floral-patterned blouse.
The woman’s throat was also stained red, indicating that her entire body
beneath the clothing might be dyed.
As Helene tried to fathom if Carol’s appearance had some bizarre
connection to the nearby festival and to those characters waving from the
flatbed truck, a patter of bare feet announced a new presence inside
reception: behind her.
Helene turned. What had come in through the open door of the Red
Barn, or had been hiding on the ground floor, immediately reduced her to a
motionless gawping. And when one of the red things issued the first shriek
and rushed at her, all she managed to do was clap a hand to her chest to
steady her heart.

20
When Kat closed her eyes the darkness spun but nothing came up to dribble
into the toilet bowl. After what she'd seen, she hadn't trusted her stomach
with more than a few pieces of dry toast and plain biscuits in days.
The woman in the headscarf was waiting for her on the landing,
watching through the open door. Either the woman or the bearded man
followed her about her tiny home now, everywhere, from room to room.
They were occupying her existence, or what remained of it.
The bearded man had just retaken possession of her phone. He’d yanked
it from her hand once she’d made the pitiful attempt at phoning Helene.
During the call to the guesthouse, Kat had been unable to follow their
script and instructions. Her uninvited visitors had been especially
displeased when she’d failed to tell Helene: ‘Some people who knew your
brother are coming to see you.’ Instead, all she’d managed was a solitary
word encased by a sob: ‘Sorry.’ And that might have been the first truthful
thing that she’d said to Helene since asking her to return to Devon.
During the brief call, as with all the calls they’d made her make, the
bearded man had been gripping her hair in his fist and his horrid breath had
slathered her cheeks and left them moist. In his other hand he’d held a flint
knife against her throat.
But Kat was sorry. So dreadfully sorry. She’d never been as sorry in her
life: the apology a caustic blend of guilt, remorse, self-loathing and fear.
Pretty much how she’d felt for every waking second of each day and night
since they’d come for her. Kat had lured Helene Brown here to die.
Matt Hull must have been the first to go. Then Steve. Oh, God, Steve.
Steve. Steve . . . Now it was Helene’s turn. A mother to that sweet little girl.
And then you. Then it’s your turn. You’re next.
Kat hated the people who’d invaded her home and life more than she’d
hated anyone or anything in her entire existence. She hadn’t known it was
possible to hate someone with a force and fury that burned like an ember
swallowed whole. By comparison, her hatred of her ex, Graham, was a
petty aversion.

For brief moments she even believed herself capable of attacking her
jailers and tearing their faces apart with her fingernails. But in these passing
moments of incendiary fury, she would remember the painful clench of the
man’s rough hands whenever the bearded bastard got hold of her arms and
dragged her to and from the cottage to make her run their errands. The
sensation of those brutish hands on her, twisting and burning the skin of her
wrists, had left a permanent trace.
Her captors had not stood more than a few feet from her since the night
they’d tapped at her window.
They said they aren’t going to kill you if you do what they ask of you.
Kat hated herself during the moments when she tried to believe her
abductors’ assurances about her safety. She was a coward: even after all
they had done to her and to the man she loved, she still followed their
instructions to the letter. Years of avoiding stress and responsibility had set
their own insidious precedent.
You have no choice.
She’d seen what they could do and would do again to anyone they
decided was a threat to . . . to what? To what they were doing. Those
psychotic and loathsome practices out at that awful farm.
The person she’d been before the night they took her to Redstone Farm
was gone, over. Now she was a woman far more broken than she’d ever
been in London. That time in her life seemed silly now. Those travails with
jobs and bullies and her ex were irrelevant; the breakups and redundancies,
the drunkenness and tears, all nonsense.
She’d not known what rock-bottom was because she’d never before
experienced things on this earth that were too awful for most people to even
imagine. And she’d done far more than merely imagine these things: while
on her knees in the dirt and the stinking darkness of that barn, she’d been
forced to bear witness to them. She’d heard every sound that had arisen
from the very ground of that place.
Kat slipped her head back over the toilet bowl, retched, gasped for
breath.
How could anyone defend themselves against that? Steve hadn’t been
able to or Matt Hull. Fit men. What chance did she have? She’d never
physically struck another person in her life. And the red folk went further
than mere beatings. Much further. There were so many of them too.
So many.

Her turn would come soon. It would have to. She didn’t know the names
of the two people in her home and had never seen them before they’d
invaded her life. But she would recognise their faces anywhere now. She’d
seen their colleagues too, their partners in crime: those they’d colluded with
to murder in ways this land couldn’t have known in millennia. Even though
all of their faces had been painted red, she’d recognise them again.
She also knew who was behind what they were doing and what they’d
done to Steve and probably to others. Assuredly, Kat knew far too much.
And after Helene disappeared and now her brother’s discs had changed
hands then what use was she to the red folk?
Kat washed her face and left the bathroom. ‘I’d like to go to my room
now,’ she said to the woman in the headscarf, who squinted at her in a
manner that was now horribly familiar. A scrunched expression, the eye
sockets creasing like wrinkled linen about permanently narrowed eyes: as
hard and mean as the shard of flint she carried in an old, veiny hand. Bitter
eyes, so alight with suspicion at all times, yet suggesting the feral volatility
Kat had observed them all to be capable of.
‘Then winders stay shut, or else,’ the creature said in a tobaccoroughened voice, blanched of compassion. ‘You even fink –’
‘I know! I know.’
‘Just so’s you do know, door still stays open till you can be trusted.’
The woman sat down on the kitchen stool on the landing outside Kat’s
bedroom. She’d positioned it there three days before so that Kat could be
observed in her bedroom even when she slept.
Downstairs, the bearded oaf opened the fridge door to take out her milk.
The electric jug bubbled.
How would they do it when the time came? That was her enduring
concern now. In here? She doubted that. Too messy, which made her recall
their own unique method for the disposal of human remains and her body
chilled to nausea once more.
No matter the endless circling of sickening anxiety and terror, her
preoccupations always returned to that question: when the time comes,
when their use of me has finished, will they butcher me in that place? And
then her interior, her weight, her sense of permanency in the world, would
appear to diffuse into thin air like a gas and she would rush for the toilet.
Short of being caught up in a war, or involved in a catastrophic accident,
she would never have believed that it was possible for a person’s life to

change beyond recognition in so short a time and by the most brutal means.
Oh, Steve.
‘God, no.’ Pressing her face deep into the pillow to stifle her anguish,
Kat acknowledged an urgent desire to run. She’d gladly run across broken
glass with bare feet and she wouldn’t stop, to avoid what they’d done to
Steve.
Kat closed her eyes. And again, her self-tormenting thoughts returned
her to that place.
***
When the stinking black hood had been yanked from her head, the vision
confronting Kat’s blinking eyes might have been one of hell itself. A
version of damnation recreated in mud and wood.
Through the enclosure of shadow, long tongues of reflected firelight had
leaped across an earthen floor, soil strewn with matted straw, the tall flames
glowing upon the wall’s stained planks. Where gaps existed between the
boards obsidian night had swallowed the outside world.
A stench of manure, blood and farm animals had arisen from the wet
ground. A noisome stink only partly tempered by the pungency of a spicy
fragrance, reminiscent of citrus fruit. Intoxicating and so strong, her eyes
had watered from exposure to the fumes. Overpowering smoke with a
fragrance similar to the skunk weed that Steve had occasionally smoked in
her presence. Only this smell was one thousand times stronger and almost
living: visible as a bluish smog among rafters intermittently revealed by the
spiking flames.
The assault on her senses – her sight, sense of smell, her hearing, the
taste in her mouth and the instinctive primal sense that screamed danger –
had immediately killed the desperate entreaties she’d been making to her
abductors.
During the journey in a vehicle she’d never glimpsed while hooded,
she’d pleaded, begged for mercy. But inside that place, Kat soon stopped
whimpering. Slumped beside the fire, she’d been rendered mute in horrified
awe.
They’d unmasked her a few feet from the snap and crackle of a fiery
conflagration. Sweat, joining tears, mucus and the horrible condensation

from inside the sack, had run freely off her chin, secretions both smearing
her face and sliding down her throat.
Red sparks had circled upwards through rags of dirty smoke while
embers had spat onto the earthen floor where they’d forced her to kneel.
Instantly, the heat had cupped and dried her eyeballs.
Her hands had been secured with green twine. Gardeners used the same
string on rose stems. Earlier, in her home, she’d been wrestled to the ground
like a steer. A bony, naked knee had been forced between her shoulders and
she’d been trussed like livestock. Her one attempt at a scream had been
silenced by a blow to the side of the head. One ear had seemed to fill with
warm water. A thickening lump had grown on her right temple and pulsed
like a small heart. Moving her jaw had remained painful.
Kat didn’t know which of the four intruders had struck her. But one of
the frightful red things that had broken into her home had knocked her near
senseless at the first sign of resistance, enabling the gang to gag her mouth
with a rag, bind her, hood her and carry her from the cottage into the cold
night.
She’d been dropped onto the unforgiving metal floor of a vehicle that
had stunk of dogs and engine oil and driven from her home as her mind had
swirled with images of beheadings, figures kneeling before trenches and the
wretched remains unearthed in woodlands by policemen who held their
forearms across their mouths as they dug . . . The whole process of her
capture had felt like a one-way street to a morgue and a coroner’s report.
Beside the great fire in the barn, the bearded man and the thin woman
with the headscarf had held her still. Her appointed handlers’ horrid hands
had been clenched in her hair. ‘See. See!’ the woman had shrieked. And Kat
had finally seen: the naked body of a man, a few feet from where she’d
knelt.
So smeared with dried blood was the figure and with the filth of the dirty
floors that he had lain upon, and so great were the black-green bruises
blossoming from swollen puncture wounds and wet rents in the flesh of his
limbs, that it had taken Kat a few seconds to recognise her lover, Steve.
He truly had been missing. He’d been snatched from out of the world,
like her, and brought here too.
It took Steve far longer to recognise her.
‘Love . . . Steve. Steve!’ Then, ‘What did you do?’ she’d screamed at
her captors.

In response, her head had been yanked to the side. ‘Shut it,’ the bearded
man had commanded.
Frantic, her burning eyes had swivelled, desperate for understanding, for
a sympathetic look, for anything that wasn’t the fire and dirt and Steve so
physically ruined. And it had hurt her eyes to focus when her teary vision
had groped the walls. Firelight had only flickered so far but in places it had
pawed at the black edge of the building’s grubby interior. Against these
walls, where the darkness reddened, murky forms had stood upright. A
dozen or so people. All unclothed, their flesh made oily with the scarlet
stain. Bare legs, sloppy breasts, rotund bellies, thin legs, the moonlike
whites of eyes maddened by fear or excitement, perhaps both. Faces
showing even more than that: those teeth-bared expressions had appeared
awestruck. To keep her feet, a woman had clung to the wall with her stained
hands as if suffering a swoon.
Kat’s gorge had risen. Exhausted either by unrelenting terror or by what
she suspected might be shock, she’d shivered hard enough to lose control of
her body. Coherent thoughts barely forming, her paranoia so intense, she’d
hyperventilated. Ever averse to the sight of blood, now exposed to it on the
body of someone she loved, she'd retched freely into the soil.
From the braziers mounted on iron stands and set against the walls, the
suffocating fumes from the burning drug had potent effect upon her mind.
The same smoke must have been disordering Steve’s, but for longer.
Stricken by the idea that her mind was unravelling and erasing itself,
she’d believed that her brain was shredding its files in some deluded sense
of self-protection, shutting down her system to prevent her continued
exposure to what was around her. She’d recalled things she hadn’t thought
of in years.
Her mother and father at her graduation.
Graham sitting on the end of their bed, staring at the blinds.
Waking up beside a bed after a binge, her nose bleeding.
Her flat in London as the sun poured through the windows in summer.
Viewing her cottage in Devon for the first time.
Slipping down the stairs in a nightclub.
Steve in his wetsuit, shaking water from his hair.
A birthday cake she had as a child, a castle made from chocolate
fingers . . .

Opening and closing in fast motion, memories had flashed vividly then
disappeared, like the film of a flower opening but speeded up. Her heart had
beat four times the recommended speed. She’d retched saliva.
Her straining senses had then become dimly aware of a new and equally
undesirable stimulus: another fresh exposure to a horror unwilling to pause.
Voices had raised themselves near her. Shrill wails joining each other,
forming a piercing falsetto and rising into a horrible skirl as much animal as
human.
A reedy piping had caught the clamour of caterwauling voices and
directed them higher. Some vocal cords had even broken into shrieks
seeking the black rafters high above, smoke-stained, web-choked beams. A
crude hole had been fashioned in the tiled roof to let out the smoke, but not
enough of it.
Kat had imagined that her skin was about to blister. Her hair would
surely catch alight. She’d been placed too close to the pyre and was soon
only able to taste smoke and her own stomach acid. A terrible thirst had
made her cough. When she’d tried again to pull away from the fire she’d
been held fast.
The female shrieks in the choir had transformed to wails never heard at
Christian funerals. An elderly woman had batted her head with her hands.
Kat had glimpsed the face within that small skull, crowned with bemired
spikes of hair, being thumped by scarlet hands: a face so wrinkled it might
have been made of bark.
A plump, bald man had stepped forward from the wall and raised his
hands into the air, his eyes fixed on something that Kat could not see. Other
men had roared, full-throated, straining their lungs. And then the woodwind
section had quickly fallen silent and the voices had dropped to a dying wail.
Someone had sobbed, briefly, in the darkness on the other side of the pyre,
then quietened until only the spit and whoosh of the flames had been
audible.
A new voice had broken the lull: one elderly and female, its words so
carefully enunciated that Kat might have been in the presence of an
aristocrat. A voice from another world, educated and imperious. A voice at
once absurd amidst the filth, fire, blood, the white eyes and the noise that
had pierced Kat’s ears and disintegrated her thoughts.
‘The past is red. The earth is red. The sky is red.’
She’d turned to the sound of the voice.

Against the dark rectangle of the double door of the agricultural
building, she’d seen that a diminutive figure had been wheeled inside.
Behind the ancient figure in the wheelchair, and about its tatty head and
through the haze of stinging smoke, the silhouettes of trees beyond the
doorway had become momentarily visible.
Crippled and sunken but unclothed, the woman had continued to speak
in a voice that sweetened to the melodic: a voice that had issued from the
black muzzle of an animal’s head. ‘Behind is red. Forward is red. The
Queen is risen and she is red.’
A tongue of fire had flapped in the direction of the speaker, this
aboriginal elder in its wheelchair, the sole item in the building to suggest
that Kat remained in the twenty-first century.
The crude red figures of the wretched barn had sniffed and wept at the
elderly woman’s arrival. They’d wiped at their white, glistening eyes.
‘All we children are red. Amen.’
‘Amen’ had been rumbled in unison around the black walls. Above
Kat’s lowered head, her captors had muttered the word too. Each of them
had then spat on the earthen floor and stamped a naked foot upon the saliva.
All around the barn the red people had ground their expulsions into the dirt.
‘So close to us now,’ the elderly woman had cried out, her voice
breathless with excitement, her frail body atremble with emotion. ‘So close
beneath our feet but also our hearts.’
About the perimeter of the fire’s light people had embraced each other.
They’d all come together in the darkness. The faces she’d glimpsed had
been alight with an unmistakable love, an intense devotion. And they’d
begun a horrid dance. A movement as grotesque as it was absurd.
Backwards they’d all gone, in a circle, in and out of the firelight, as if
entranced by the new, solemn notes of the pipes, functioning like a
marionette’s strings to jerk them about her and poor broken Steve.
The dreadful eyes of the red people had rolled up white and it must have
been the effects of the burning drug that suggested that their arms could
snap and move in such contortions behind their backs, or when raised into
the air in exultation. Kat had never imagined that the aged could contort
themselves so.
Confusion mingling with terror, her eyes blurring with smoke, her face
filmed with grease, she’d panted like a dog. And for several seconds Kat
had believed that she’d been rising into the air; terrified that if she didn’t

grip the floor, her feet would have ascended to the roof beams. Her trainers
might have been filled with helium. Her head, disproportionately, had been
as heavy as a bag of wet sand. She’d doubted her neck could support the
weight of her skull.
‘Kat.’ It was Steve. He’d finally become aware of her. He’d been crying.
Kat had opened her mouth but her tongue had been too thick and heavy,
a large slug. She’d doubted she had a voice left at all.
A vibration had passed beneath her knees. Through the soil a mighty
current of electricity may have thrummed. Deeper still had come the rumble
of thunder, or rocks grinding, or the earth moving. A tremor from deep
within the soil.
‘Give her scent,’ the old creature in the chair had intoned. ‘Let what is
so great fill red. Let the walls and the air be red. Let the earth soak red and
the sky be red. Let us be blessed in the red. We are red. This, our
reddening.’
‘Reddening’ was shrieked about the barn.
The wizened figure in the wheel chair had risen swiftly from its seated
position, thin arms raised high. And as if young again, the woman had
walked, in a wretched parody of provocation, across the dung and soil. Each
heel placed perfectly before each set of toes, her withered hips swaying: a
demented pastiche of a catwalk model with that shaggy, bestial head
grinning through the firelight.
And at the figure’s approach, Kat had suddenly cramped with a fear that
the attention of whatever peered through the black muzzle would turn upon
her.
The congregation had issued fresh cries of awe before the miracle, if that
was what it had been: the lame walking, the decrepit renewed. Others had
ventured forward from the far side of the fire and out of the darkness.
Naked, oiled forms. Devil faces creosoted in dye. In their midst had been a
thin, bent figure, leaning upon a stick. A furred wolfish head had dwarfed
its frail body, seeming to weigh the torso down at a tilt.
With reverence, a younger woman and a portly man had each held an
elbow to lead the tottering figure closer to the fire. They encircled Steve.
What happened next did not remain entirely clear in Kat’s memory. One
of few mercies she was granted that night. And she’d later wondered how
much she’d seen or only imagined. She now even wondered if she’d been
dreaming in that barn with her eyes wide open.

Through the skeins of smoke, the barn’s timbers had transformed into
walls of stone, but without her noticing the transition. Rock walls had
appeared on either side of her and above her head. A cave chalked, painted
red. Upon the rough rock surfaces the sensual silhouettes of beasts had been
shaped from charcoal: herds of animals, glimpsed betwixt rags of smoke.
The creatures had been moving too. Their thin legs had flickered back and
forth as the beasts had surged. Horses, oxen, reindeer. And yet, impossibly,
the animals had remained in place upon the walls, running forever but never
progressing.
It was around the time of her hallucinations when she’d realised that
Steve had been tethered to an iron ring, cemented into the rough floor: a
short chain lying idle beneath his legs, the links connecting his ankle to a
circular mooring. He’d been placed upon a patch of firmer ground, a lighter
patch of floor, level with the soil. A portion partly cleared of dung and
straw to reveal cement and a metal grille. Steve hadn’t been lying on the
earth.
When the elderly male figure in the mask had begun uttering a series of
deep, croaking noises at the back of its throat, Kat had been reminded of a
Siberian throat singer she’d once seen in London at a music festival. But
this man’s performance would never make Time Out: this was something
the general public were not supposed to see.
Two men had immediately stepped forward from behind the masked
elder and seized Steve under his arms.
Kat’s lover hadn’t resisted. It seemed he’d become accustomed, or
broken, to this method of transport.
The fire’s light had offered a better view of the shaggy muzzle of the
beast man’s mask. Flame-red illumination had flickered over black gums
and the aged enamel protruding from a permanently open mouth, the
mask’s jaws and teeth resembling those of a great animal, a preserved
panther or lion. The surrounding features might also have been a replication
of a canine head: pug-snouted, whiskered, flat-skulled and broad in the
forehead. And from within the darkness of the tatty jaws the elderly man
had gutturalised and grunted what might have been human words rendered
in a savage tongue.
It had been a command.
Hair gripped in a greasy, red fist, Steve’s head had promptly been
pushed into the noisome floor of the barn. And his arms had been arranged

at the side of his body, his legs following: his body shaped into a star, facedown.
Instinctively, Kat had surged toward him but was held fast by the hair
and throat. She’d instantly suffered thoughts of broken bones in glass
cubicles at Exeter Museum: shattered fragments, rusticated the colour of
bleached seashells.
The old man’s dog head had grunted out fresh commands in the bestial
language and Kat had recalled where she’d heard similar before: the voice
on the recordings that Helene’s brother had made at Redstone Cross, the
brother who’d vanished.
She’d sobbed then, sobbed at her own helplessness. And at that point in
the wretched proceedings, Kat might have pleaded too, on Steve’s behalf,
but hadn’t known if she’d been shouting or merely whispering, or only
thinking of a protest. Confusion, terror and a sickening dread had swamped
her consciousness.
A burly male figure, its beard a tangled mess of red scrub, had then knelt
beside Steve’s ear. He’d held a dark lump of stone against Steve’s face. The
rock had flickered with the pyre’s reflections before the point of the tool
was repositioned above the nape of Steve’s neck.
Kat had later queried whether she’d passed out at that point because she
remembered being shaken while someone had hissed, ‘See!’ into her ear.
But she’d kept her eyes closed as a human scream had broken into a cough.
The cough had then evolved into a moist, glottal rasp, suggesting that a
terrible finality had been achieved.
When she’d been slapped alert, what she saw had since existed in
haphazard form, in flashes.
Sinewy forearms glistening by firelight. Hands slippery and gloved in
bright scarlet. A hand sawing. Another hand tugging at hair and raising a
head too far from its shoulders.
The congregation had committed their voices to fresh ululations:
exultant, deafening, born from their rejoicing. And in the red barn the fire
had leaped higher as four men worked like butchers.
Slick, wet sounds from the carving. Sharp black stones in wet fists, up
and down. Hack hack hack. Crack of bone, the stretching and splitting of
sinew. The black air seething yet squeezing her with its undersea pressures.
Smoke billowing about wet straw.

The stone ceiling had seemed to lower to crush Kat’s mind. Then the
roof had vaulted up and away and she’d wondered if the ceiling of rock had
completely gone and the only remaining things were the fire, the stars she
saw and the nothingness between them. A void that she could have fallen
into at any time.
Her stomach had turned itself inside out. She’d gulped for air but
swallowed more of the burning blue smoke. Around her skull thoughts and
nonsense had swirled as if it had been stirred from above with a ladle. Her
head had been pulled about to watch the slap of a heavy, whitish limb upon
the ground before her eyes.
Followed by another.
On the ground there had been a dirty torso with no arms. The neck an
oval, white at the centre, a thick snake cut in half.
Forceful sawing between the legs into the V of the groin’s meat.
Kat had coughed saliva onto her thighs.
At the edge of her vision had lain an upturned hand, lifeless, the curling
fingers dirty.
She’d screamed and screamed.
The red people had shrieked too, they’d brayed like beasts of the field.
Their vocal cords had found impossible ranges. Their reedy ululations had
made them eunuchs, castrated animals. Each oily face she’d glimpsed had
broadened, become more bulbous, scarred and pugnacious. Brute faces, oaf
mouths, leather-breasted and bloodied forms shrieking amidst the smoke.
On the walls the animals had continued to lurch, wide-eyed, forever
stampeding the ground that had trembled beneath Kat’s shivering body.
Wet parts had been raised from the mess on the floor. Heavy meats had
been passed out to so many reaching red hands.
Slippery fingers had pulled her forehead upwards so that she could
better see a tongue being sawn from out of a human head: one already
missing its lower jaw.
‘Cuckoos, gabbers and narks all get theirs,’ a voice had said.
Dirty knees had bumped her arms. Naked feet had slapped the soil about
her fingers. A woman had panted with sexual desire.
She’d looked away, to the side, to the door, as if to draw the colder air
into her polluted lungs. But, alas, in such places where hell is made on earth
one can never look away from the business of depravity. That had been his
jawbone that she had. That old thing that had risen so youthfully from the

wheelchair was unmasked now. And a jawbone had been cracked open and
was grasped within its long fingers. Her wrinkled mouth had suckled.
They didn’t cook him. They’d consumed his parts raw.
The horror that was behind us in this land is the horror that is now and
ahead of us. That has already begun . . . That is come again.
Kat had known it at once, had accepted it. The awareness had dawned
with the clarity of a single, finely wrought note, piercing her paddings of
disbelief, shock and the nausea of intoxication.
A voice then. From the bearded man who’d held her face upwards, her
handler: ‘The old ones feed in the old way.’ She thought that’s what he’d
said. And then, ‘Watchum your bastard git capped.’
That she hadn’t watched. She’d have put her own eyes out with her
fingernails when the butcher began his careful chiselling upon the beloved
crown of Steve’s head. And at that moment she understood that she’d never
loved him as much as she had done right then.
Nothing left in her stomach but still it had attempted to empty her body
of contaminated air and the brutal sounds of stone on meat and bone and of
the sight of those ape-mouths sucking on what grimy fingers had pulled
from the feast. And when Kat had dared to hope that her own end would
arrive, so that she could be spared what they were making her see, a devil
had opened its throat beneath the ground.
Echoing from out of a chamber beneath the barn, or this cave, or
whatever this wretched space had become in a fog of smoke, transforming
the walls from wood to stone, had come a cackle and yip that Kat had been
certain was a human laugh.
A shriek had followed, one distorted by schizophrenia and amplified to
ear-splitting volume.
The full-throated baying of a hound.
Followed by the chitter-chatter of an ape.
Nasal whines from a vast muzzle.
Yelps and whinnies. Exotic, zoolike, unearthly.
The ground had shaken from sounds culled from the lowest part of a
vocal range, below her knees, but no longer so far down. Her mind was
squeezed, crushed and flattened by what had vibrated through her ears.
The metal grille, in the centre of the cement that Steve had been tethered
to, had been raised from the earth and a noxious wave of air had plumed

from the aperture. The stench had made Kat panic as if she’d been exposed
to poisonous gas.
Yip yip yip.
Into the dark hole her lover’s parts had been tossed. And from down
there, in eager receipt of the wet tumble, had come a scrabbling of great
claws upon the rock.
Kat had screwed herself into a ball as the red people had fallen over each
other in their haste to escape what bayed and leaped and circled from below
their bemired feet. Only the elderly male figure in the doggish mask had
stood firm. He’d appeared more upright: impossibly taller, erect, the head
and shoulders thrown back. And into the air he’d shaken his staff and from
his shabby muzzle he’d coughed and growled out more of the rough,
unintelligible sounds.
Kat had seen no great beast with muscular flanks that rippled beneath a
reeking hide. But she had seen something, or experienced its presence,
though only behind her closed eyes and within her mind as the tremendous
expulsion of hot, foul air had belched from the ground and filled the cave.
A mighty bleat had resounded inside her skull.
Inside her mind she’d also seen a geyser of panic erupt in the wild
brown eyes of an animal: orbs peeled by panic into the size of apples. These
eyes had filled her thoughts as the creature’s flesh had been torn into by
spears and sharpened stones. She’d felt the great impact of a woollen side
slammed against a snow-dusted earth. Another victim from another time but
brought here. Reason had become irrelevant but she’d navigated those
images as if dreaming. She’d been in the presence of the red. Known this at
once, instinctively. There, in that place, had existed an impossible
continuity from another time to this one.
And she’d seen these things behind her squeezed-shut eyes: the roughfaced, both young and old, male and female, their bodies stringy and dirty
as they’d plodded into a fire-strobed darkness on unshod feet. Tatty-headed
people herded by red devils. She’d seen their huddled forms dragged to the
floor and sawn into. All in this very place, in other times. Razor flint, black
and iridescent, parting joints, separating limbs from . . . for ever and ever.
Down there, under the barn, she’d listened to the consummation of the
rite. Slippery bones had been crunched by teeth that must have been longer
than thumbs. Devils that once clawed that very ground had pawed the fetid
soil again: she sensed the steam-breathing snouts of black things that had

once trodden the earth when it was much colder, those that had flowed
sinewy from out of crevices and galloped the surrounding plains. And they
had been returned for a terrible succour in that same darkness, partially
illumined by firelight.
Had there been words in that pit too? Voices? She’d thought so, but in no
language that she’d ever recognise.
Eventually rough hands had pulled her backwards and away from the
fire.
All who’d been summoned to that awful place had withdrawn from the
lightless crevice in the floor, a fissure in stone, beneath the grate that had
been Steve’s final bed. Inside the barn, all had retreated save the elderly
man who’d stood too tall and the smeared ancient woman who had risen
from her wheelchair to prance and parade like a young girl before a
bedroom mirror.

21
Outside, four dogs had kept pace with Kat and her captors. Hounds that had
come and gone, milling, circling, walking point, pausing to raise their noses
into the cold night as she was pulled to a second broken building. Rusting
bars had gridded its solitary window.
That room’s interior had resembled a workshop and had reeked of oiled
steel, dust, damp wood. Amber light had fallen from bulbs collared by old
tin funnels. A long rectangular table dominated, its timber surface scarred,
vices attached to the sides. Worn drilling and sawing equipment had rusted
in a corner. Dirty rendered walls thickly lined with metal shelves had been
crowded with variously sized stones, lumps of rock and long bones.
The surface of a second workbench had been scattered with tools and
open boxes, oily rags and dross. But upon that surface Kat had seen a great
tusk: bigger, thicker and longer than an elephant’s. Mammoth: she’d seen
them at the exhibition in Exeter.
From the workshop two men had carried her through a connecting door
and into an annexe, a smaller space with red walls turned powdery from
damp. Inside, an elderly man had sat upon an old office chair: a red room
with an old red man inside.
His withered form was no longer so straight. He’d wilted and re-aged.
Sweat streaking his thin, whiskery face had made the rheumy blue eyes
weep blood. Beside his foot, his evil-looking headgear had grimaced in
silence.
The old figure had nodded at the two men gripping Kat’s upper arms and
they’d released her to the floor, where she’d shivered, gasping, her toxic
shock lingering as a permanent electrification of nerve and sense. The
liquor from her nausea had made her skin slick.
The old, ruined man had smiled. His teeth had been bad, missing in
places, top and bottom at the front. Those remaining were deformed:
whittled yellow pegs. He might have been imbecilic had his eyes not leered
with such a frightful confidence and cruel intelligence.

‘The red miraculous. You don’t know yourself.’ Like the elderly woman
who’d worn an animal mask, his words had purred, a voice enriched by
privilege. ‘What comes to us is too great to know.’ He’d said this while
nodding his scraggy head as if sharing knowledge that Kat already
possessed: a man merely retelling and reaffirming what was known by all
present. ‘So be thankful you never saw the pack.’
When the figure had winced and leaned to the side his eyes had lost
focus, the smile dying. He’d slumped and sighed, wafting a bony hand in
the air. ‘How it comes and goes . . .’ he’d said quietly to himself and she’d
been convinced of his madness. ‘There aren’t songs. Why try?’
Kat had swallowed the burning sensation in her throat to speak.
‘Willows . . . You’re Tony.’
One of the old eyes had reopened and filled with a brief awareness of
itself, then closed again.
‘The recordings, Tony.’ This new voice had originated from behind her
shoulder, from the bearded man who had snatched her from out of her home
and her life so that he could hold her down in animal shit while they’d done
that to Steve.
‘Yes, E. Ours. Bring our songs home,’ Tony had muttered.
The bearded man had pressed his slimy face against Kat’s, the sensation
of his wet hair on her eyelids making her cringe. ‘Her brother wiv the
recorder we gave up to the red, yeah? You know what I’m saying. We don’t
have narks here. He found that out. That one whose just gone froo red jaws
would tell you that too, if he could. But he’s gone froo the walls, see. So
this girl with the discs, you will bring to us. Your fella give you up easy. But
you don’t have to go where he’s gone.’
Kat hadn’t understood much of what he’d said and hadn’t responded.
‘Another life. All gone,’ Tony had muttered and rubbed his sunken
chest.
Against her cheek, she’d felt the wet beard widen into a grin. ‘Guess
how old he is, yeah? Nearly eighty. Shouldn’t be here. Heart. His heart was
fucked. And her, guess how old? Witchwife’s even older. Cancer should
have had her twice. The red bit it out. The red looks after its own, yeah?
Some is favoured. You is not, nor him . . .’ The bearded figure at her side
had snorted a chuckle and Kat had known he’d been referring to Steve.
‘You don’t know nuffing. We’s the ones who let the dogs in.’ He’d chuckled
to himself, his breath a wheeze, and tapped his hoary head before pointing

at the floor. ‘You wouldn’t believe what’s down there. But turn that word
inside out and dog becomes “God”. Yeah? Yeah? You see, hmm? I fink you
might grasp a bit of it.’
Old Tony on the chair had merely shrugged and opened his old hands as
if this business had nothing to do with him; as if he’d merely been a
spectator, indifferent to the woman before his gnarled feet. Then he’d
grinned like an idiot. ‘Old Creel. Those pups hunger, what?’
The wet beard had brushed Kat’s ear again. ‘In times coming. Terrible it
is, terrible times . . . There’s what, seven billion of us? Who gives a fuck?
They don’t. You’s all going. You is, yeah?’
His breath had been too foul for her to focus on much else. She’d not
understood much of the idiotic jabber either and thought it a halfunderstood version of what the bearded oaf had been told by someone else:
knowledge he believed fervently that had enabled him to perform such
inhuman acts upon a stranger. She’d truly entered a land of psychotics and
met its crazed inhabitants.
‘All going. Going, going, going,’ Tony had said. He’d seemed to think
his affected sardonic air was funny; he’d been amused with himself. He
might have been drunk, drugged or just deranged.
Kat’s own mind had remained full to capacity with what the smoke had
done. What she’d experienced her mind had quickly put from itself in order
to survive the ordeal, leaving her unthinking, unresisting and numb. She
hadn’t trusted her thoughts since: her short recall was full of blanks.
‘Please,’ she’d said to stem the hysteria that had wanted to burst free.
‘It’s in the stones.’ Tony had pointed at the floor. ‘There’s sound in the
red earth. Music. Visions. Poems.’
Other bodies had crowded into the room. Another man had crouched
beside Kat, taking the place of the foul-breathed oaf who’d abducted her.
This man’s hair was thinning and scraped over his skull. A thin rat’s tail
soaked in red ochre had fallen down his naked back. In one hand he’d held
a joint and the smoke had seared Kat’s eyes. When her discomfort had
registered he’d deliberately held the burning weed under her chin.
‘What Daddy and my associate are trying to tell you is that you are
going to bring those recordings to us. All of her fucking gadgets. This girl
that has them, some sister, yes, of that thief we put to the red years ago. She
comes to us with what she has, yes? You understand? Dear Steve told us all

about her. Helene. And her CDs. That music belongs here and shouldn’t be
above the ground, ever. So how this plays out is now up to you, yes?’
He’d then dropped his well-spoken voice to a whisper. ‘You wouldn’t
believe what we can see. Backwards. Forwards. All about. Including right
into every nook and cranny of your drab life. We’re completely out of our
heads right now. It takes time to readjust but I’m positive you get the gist,
yes? So you’ve some messages to pass on to dear Helene.
'You know, she was even here. We had her here! She came here, like her
brother. Nosing. Cuckoos. Neither of them had one iota of sense. They
couldn’t begin to imagine what they were fucking with. And if you never
want to see us, or this place again, or come anywhere near what we have
down below, then you’ve some arrangements to make.’
Kat had nodded her assent.
‘You’ll never forget tonight and don’t try and understand it. Because you
won’t, ever. None of this is for you, yeah? I can sense that. You’re bright
enough to lay off. So play along and the big dogs won’t bite.
‘My associates will take you home now, so you can get the ball rolling
with Helene. Once you’ve finished throwing up and all that.’
At the outer limits of her hearing, possibly from beyond the doorway, a
voice had said, ‘He’s here. Five minutes.’
And then Kat’s head had been re-gloved by the hood and she’d been
taken outside. A car engine had rumbled in the distance and she’d been
half-dragged towards it.
Voices and the sound of bare feet had come and gone within her
blindness. Someone had wept. She’d heard an animal cough and had
whimpered at the sound. When dog claws had scratched about the road
surface near her feet and a wet snout had sniffed her crotch, she’d
screamed.
Overhead lights had bathed the ground as she’d neared the idling car
engine. She’d heard the roar of a plane’s engine, too close to the ground.
Lying on the cold metal floor of the van, barely able to breathe, she’d
then been taken home. Impossibly, unbelievably, they’d driven her home.
They hadn’t cut her apart and fed her to the devils in the cave, nor chiselled
off the top of her skull. They’d just taken her home to its absurd light and
modernity and possessions that meant nothing and offered no security.
Two uninvited guests had stayed with her and they’d not let her out of
their sight since. Naked and sobbing, her hands flat against the tiles, she’d

even showered before the eyes of the murdering strangers. But no amount
of hot water and continual scrubbing had rid her body of the terrible stench
that had dispersed from the cleft in their red earth. And nothing on the
planet would ever scrub her mind clean of what they’d done to Steve.

22
His mum and dad. His bloody mum and dad.
Steve’s mother, Delia, was coming apart on her sofa. Kat doubted she’d
ever seen a body shake as much. Reg clutched his wife’s hands as if to
prevent her twitching free of the furniture.
Delia was barely recognisable. Naturally thin maybe but she’d recently
developed a crippling stoop. Legs and hips at the point of collapse, she’d
been led inside the cottage by her husband. Only one eye seemed to be
functioning behind her glasses. While crisis pummelled her mind and set
fire to her nervous system, all of Delia’s focal power was concentrated into
that one interrogative orb.
Kat’s call to them, three days before, had fertilised the first seed of
concern in Delia about her son. The seed had germinated into chronic
anxiety and subsequently flowered into a panic that required sedation.
Over the last few days, Delia’s periodic calls to establish if Kat had
‘heard anything yet’ had been her only contact with Steve’s parents. Her
petty estrangement from Reg and Delia had maintained a distance but it had
finally been erased by parental terror: a fear now slipping towards grief.
Mourning was the unavoidable conclusion to their plight, though Kat was
unable to get them started on what she was suffering.
Reg had never entirely disapproved of their son’s choice of girlfriend.
Kat had shared the occasional bout of camaraderie with Steve’s dad and
they both read le Carré. At the handful of stilted dinners she’d endured with
them, he’d found Kat’s company easy enough when Delia wasn’t
micromanaging him and everyone else in the room. But little bread had
been broken between them.
Now, Kat wondered if she’d ever experienced such desperate social
discomfort. She was trapped by it, clueless about what to offer the couple
by way of support. Hideously, what made things easier was her inability to
share anything other than what the red folk had told her to say.
In a single, mad surge of excitement that nearly became action, she did
consider telling his parents the truth. Just letting it all spill from her mouth.

But she remembered the keen edge of the bearded man’s flint against her
soft throat and she assumed that if she confessed, the red folk would have
no choice but to butcher all three of them.
When Steve’s parents arrived, her two guardians had retreated to the
kitchen. As she’d been instructed, Kat had meekly told Reg and Delia that
the strange man and woman in her home were neighbours offering support.
Steve’s parents had accepted the lie without comment. They weren’t
interested in her arrangements, they just wanted their son back.
The red folk now stood near the kitchen door and listened to every word
that was being exchanged in the living room. Neither Reg nor Delia seemed
aware of them. Scrubbed of the red dye, her jailers were merely ordinary,
scruffy people.
Reg spoke in taut specifics. ‘It was a farmer out by Whaleham. He saw a
person in the water. This was the same evening that Steve took his walk.’
The mention of ‘water’ quickly sent Delia into a fresh paroxysm of
shudders.
‘They think,’ Reg continued, ‘that he might have fallen. And with the
tide going out and an offshore wind . . . The farmer reported it to the
coastguard. They sent a boat from Divilmouth but couldn’t find him. This
all happened before we knew he was missing. Apparently it’s happened
before, with walkers. Out there.’
‘But what was he doing there, at that time?’ Delia shrieked, as if
fatigued by her husband’s soft voice and his considered words, so weary
with resignation. For Delia, this was no time for polite reasoning; it was
high time answers were thumped out of people. ‘He must have told you! He
was always here!’ Her one sentient eye bored into Kat; she sensed it
searching the interior of her skull, seeking insincerity.
Sheila’s contact on the force, Lewis, had called Kat that morning to take
a more official statement about Steve. That time, the levity had been absent
from the detective's voice. Kat had assumed that the humouring smirk had
also been stowed, chastened by the reality of an actual missing person,
something he’d almost laughed off in Sheila’s office.
During the call, Detective Lewis never mentioned Steve’s Redstone
Farm theories, nor anything of that nature that she’d recounted to him when
they’d met at L&S. Nor did he refer to anything she’d said about Matt Hull.
Kat wondered how thoroughly those details were being investigated, if at
all.

Prompting the detective for progress on those fronts had been impossible
because the bearded oaf who’d invaded her home had been holding a flint
knife under her jaw. He’d also put the call on speaker and then confiscated
the phone. She had no landline. Her laptop and tablet had been removed. As
far as she knew they were no longer at the property.
Numb with dread now, Kat felt unable to do much but sit patiently and
listen to Reg’s account of how he and Delia had busied themselves with the
coastguard, the police, the local hospitals and their son’s extended network
of friends: the windsurfers and old schoolmates, anyone who might offer
some flotsam of optimism about Steve’s whereabouts. As if Kat couldn’t be
trusted, she’d been cut out of this investigation through official channels.
Had her own circumstances been different, she’d have been offended by the
dismissal.
But they’d never know the truth. Never know why they’d never see their
only son again, alive or dead. Kat was the only person in Steve’s sphere
who knew he wasn’t coming back, not ever. There was nothing left to
return.
Kat failed to stem the return of the vague, opaque state of mind that
Steve’s parents had disrupted. Her attention drifted, musing on the fresh
perspectives brought here by her dead lover’s parents, these pale, hapless
figures sitting on her sofa.
The news of a ‘farmer’s’ report to the coastguard about a ‘person in the
water’ offered chilling insights into those behind Steve’s ghastly demise.
This witness was clearly lying: Steve had never been in the water. So that
would mean the farmer was covering for Willows’s sect, this coven, cult or
whatever it was that these ‘red children’ had formed near that stretch of
coast.
This also served as endorsement of Matt Hull’s claims that Redstone
Farm had a long local reach. When she’d met Helene at the Redhill festival,
her guardians had exchanged looks of recognition with others: the subtle
slide or narrowing of their eyes that day had not escaped Kat. They’d also
fielded numerous calls since occupying her home; people had come to the
door with supplies, all part of the network.
Kat recalled the few farms marked on Steve’s map, dotted between
Divilmouth and Brickburgh; Redhill was the sole village. For all she knew,
everyone living in that borough was part of Willows’s operation. She and

Steve had been clueless about what they were up against until it was too
late.
Only Matt Hull had offered any vestige of the sinister truth. An insider
who’d loosened the crust. Her boyfriend had knocked the scab off. Because
she was a journalist with a connection to each man they’d unwittingly
served her with notice of an impending, vile death.
She wanted to be sick again.
Steve’s hunches had been right. And there also existed a lead to Lincoln,
Helene’s brother. The man at the farm with the wispy beard and rat face had
admitted as much. She assumed the weasel was Tony Willows’s son, Finn:
he’d been mentioned on Wikipedia.
They’d murdered Lincoln Brown six years before. Helene’s brother had
gone ‘to the red’, not off a bridge in Bristol. As no body had been found,
Kat had to assume that Lincoln had been slaughtered like Steve. His suicide
and Steve’s slipping from the cliffs in the dark were setups. Matt Hull was
missing. The walker, the campers: no bodies in any situations strung across
six years and counting.
The imminent slaughter of Helene, whom she’d lured to the coast with
promises of news of her brother’s last week alive, plus herself: the tally was
mounting.
Was Helene even still alive?
Clothing folded on the shore and cars left at notorious sites used by
suicides: easy to arrange. No evidence of foul play. The red people had
form; the craft of disappearing someone was much practised.
This compelled her to wonder how many other souls had been disposed
of at the farm, because this was serial murder committed by a group. Ritual
murder. And maybe it even began when the young woman died in
mysterious circumstances at one of Tony Willows’s debauches in the late
Seventies. Perhaps the abattoir had been open long before then. She’d never
know.
Didn’t killers often get away with their crimes for years? Many of them
were never caught at all. Kat was aware of the theories, including the one
that suggested that most missing people were the victims of serial killers.
No witnesses, no bodies and the tracks went cold within twenty-four hours.
Unknowingly, she might have been living next to a cottage-murderindustry for years. It was preposterous. Here, where people took their
holidays in caravans, where snowbirds retired with a sea view. Absurdity

and improbability the best camouflage that Tony Willows could have asked
for; far better than his masquerade as a recluse.
Right here, a broad slate was being wiped clean. Nothing was being left
to chance. Every leak, no matter how vague, was being sealed. And when
Kat considered the age of the caves and of what had been found inside
them, the true length of Brickburgh’s murderous legacy could only be
imagined.
Heartbroken girlfriend of drowned man commits suicide: Kat
experienced no difficulty writing the headline of her own obituary. She was
next.
But the motives of the red folk? They didn’t seem so simple.
Matt Hull and Steve had seen things; Lincoln had recorded weird
underground noises on Tony’s land. They’d been caught snooping. Narks,
that’s what the bearded oaf, earwigging from her kitchen, had called Steve:
‘a nark’.
But were people dying because of the drugs or because they’d passed
close to something else, something unnatural? Something that had been
hidden under that farm for years? Something far worse than a crop of weed?
The implications of what she’d heard beneath that barn, while drugged
by the intolerable skunk fumes, she’d barely considered since, because
memories of the bestial sounds were always accompanied by vivid images
of Steve’s end: the jumbled, blurred and assorted stages of his butchery,
murky yet poignant recollections that continually made her sick.
And yet everything she’d believed about the earth, the cosmos and the
natural laws that governed it might no longer be the whole story.
With what mental capacity fear had allowed her to reason with, she’d
struggled with that idea more than anything else.
The red man with the ponytail had advised her not to attempt an
understanding of what she’d experienced. Enlightenment for her was an
impossibility: that had been his message. But it was reasonable to assume
that whatever had noisily consumed the son of the two people currently
falling apart in her living room might not have been natural in the sense that
she’d previously considered anything to be natural. When lying a few feet
from that awful crack in the earth, what she’d heard from beneath the
ground of an outbuilding did not easily occupy any ‘normal’ classification
of animal that she could identify.

There was always a slim chance that Tony kept wild and savage beasts
down there, inside a cave or pen – attack dogs, big cats. And there had been
several things down there, a pack of some kind. Drug dealers had macho
affectations. Weren’t people always seeing odd things on the moors like big
cats?
But other fragments of evidence did not support this wishful thinking.
How had the two elderly and decrepit individuals in that barn assumed the
stature, dexterity and strength of people aged a fraction of their years? Why
had the wooden walls become stone before her eyes? How had rock walls
painted with the prehistoric imagery of extinct animals become animated?
Might the effects of the burning drug have caused her delusions? Had
everyone in that barn been hallucinating too?
Or did Tony Willows’s farm maintain an unnatural continuity with the
past? An era most bloody and cruel, in which survival was determined by
the murder of others within a cold, harsh climate.
Relics from such a time, tens of thousands of years earlier, had littered
the cases of the museum in Exeter. The dig was no more than three miles
from Redstone Farm.
Kat was surprised at herself for even entertaining the idea. But how
could it not be considered?
The ritual and ceremonial practices attributed to the Red Queens of
Brickburgh and their homicidal shamanic successors might still be a going
concern. Cannibals had occupied those caves, on and off, across sixty
thousand years. Neanderthal children had been devoured a stone’s throw
from Redstone Cross. Human heads had been capped, bones splintered,
then gnawed for their marrow by busy human teeth. The shelves of Tony’s
outbuildings had been crammed with artefacts.
While psychotic from LSD overuse, maybe Tony Willows had found
something on his land and copied it? It seemed unimaginable, the stuff of
fiction. But Kat knew the only things stranger than fiction were the people
who inhabited reality.
‘But why was he even there? On those cliffs. That’s what I don’t
understand!’ Delia shrieked, breaking Kat’s preoccupation. Reg’s muttered
pleas for Delia to calm herself were ignored.
He was there because he was looking for a crazy story about an old folk
singer who grew drugs on his farm, who made people disappear if they
trespassed on his land. And your son discovered that his crazy, paranoid

conspiracy theory was half-true, and that the whole truth was far worse.
But he died with all of this knowledge. As I will too, with what I know. Soon.
Kat excused herself from the living room. She went upstairs to be sick.
The old woman in the headscarf followed her. ‘Juz seein’ she’s OK,’ she
said to Reg and Delia.
Delia was crying again. Reg remained polite and said, ‘Of course. Thank
you for helping Kat. You’re so very kind.’
Upstairs in the bathroom, Kat fell to her knees.

23
Being in the presence of open sea offers a unique perspective. Even when
an onlooker is standing a few feet from where the foamy shallows lap the
sand, beholding such an indifferent vastness can consume a mind. A
fleeting comprehension conjures the sense of deep personal insignificance
and an acute vulnerability before an insurmountable, barely knowable
presence.
A belittling of the sense of self is even more apparent when you are
afloat upon the surface of the sea, aware of those leagues of empty, lightless
water below your frail body. Being beyond sight of land can electrify a
mind with wonder but mostly with a great and suffocating terror. Helene
only experienced the latter.
She spent a fair bit of her free time at home in water, swimming in the
safe, chlorinated pool of a local leisure centre. Up and down, up and down,
until she’d covered one mile, three afternoons each week before picking up
her daughter from school. As an adult she’d swum in the sea too, during
holidays in Spain and Portugal, but that was many years before she became
a mother.
During her short trip to Devon Helene never expected to find herself so
suddenly and intimately reacquainted with the heaving power of the ocean:
the elemental vastness, the swamping pressure upon her mind shaping
prospects too frightening to analyse, and promising to be the last thing
she’d ever experience.
Even before they’d removed the hood, she’d smelled the brine and heard
the slop and splash of the swell against the hull of the boat she’d been taken
aboard. Below deck, she had become instantly aware of the immensity of
unlit water surrounding the vessel, and of the depthless canopy of air above
the sea’s surging surface.
The three-man crew took her a long way out. As the motor of the boat
chugged, even though she was hooded and without sight, she’d sensed the
safety of land reducing to a thin strip of darkness behind her, twinkling with
occasional lights, so far off and beyond reach.

The comprehension of what she was being ferried into had made her
shudder bone-deep and she’d whimpered like a child. What was about to
swallow her seemed far more frightening than the intentions of those who’d
seized and bound her like an animal they’d trapped. But they were only
people. Horrible, callous, cruel and psychotic strangers who’d painted
themselves red for some bizarre reason known only to themselves. The
threat of the sea was deeper, colder, less personal, impervious to entreaties
or negotiation. The sea didn’t even let you breathe beneath its monumental
surface. The very idea of so much open water had accelerated her
agoraphobic panic.
Earlier, in darkness, three men had boarded the boat with Helene. Two
of them had carried her below deck. Prior to casting off, and for some time
once their van stopped rattling down a steep hill, their feet had crunched on
sand and pebbles. She’d heard their exertions, the gasps and grunts as
they’d carried her weight and length through the night. Their feet had
eventually sloshed through shallow water and only then was she reminded
of how the temperature dropped like a stone once you were mere feet from
the sea’s surface.
Her legs had been tied together at the knee. That felt odd, her knees
bound, with the twine wrapped around a towel. Her arms were secured at
the elbow with a second towel slipped between her joints and the binding of
rope. But not secured by wrists and ankles? She’d been bound at the
guesthouse, on the floor of reception, as if her captors hadn’t wanted the
bindings to hurt her if she struggled. But concern for her comfort was the
furthest thing from their minds.
The people with the red faces who’d come running through the house
like excited hell clowns and then pulled her to the ground were not on the
boat. But images of them had endured in Helene’s mind the whole time
she’d lain on the metal floor of the van that took her to the shore. Inside the
closeness of the hood, her most vivid memory had been of Carol making
that horrible dingo sound. As Helene was seized, from behind the reception
desk the elderly woman had barked like an old lunatic mistaking itself for a
dog.
Their job done, Carol had stayed behind at the guesthouse with her
blood-faced comrades. The men on the boat weren’t painted. Their eyes
weren’t swivelling, wide and messed-up on some kind of drug either.
They’d been outside when she was captured and bound. Their van had been

parked in a lane shielded by a hedgerow, near the guesthouse. The first
wave of attack had involved the red lunatics; the second assault comprised
three unpainted men in drab, ordinary clothes. The latter had been more
methodical, silent, less aggressive.
Aboard the little boat, when they finally ripped the hood from her head,
the crew didn’t look her in the eye. Whatever they’d planned they wanted
done quickly. They weren’t drunk and she felt no sexual threat: the only
upside she could scratch from the situation. Nor did they want to hear what
she had to say. Onboard, the muffling rag remained taut between her jaws.
Once Helene blinked away the tears scalding her eyes, she was
confronted by the confines of the small white cabin. She lay between a
padded bench and what resembled a kitchenette counter in a caravan.
The boat appeared new, its surfaces shiny. No scratches, no signs of
wear. A few cupboards, a little table supported by aluminium legs, a padded
bench seat, three steps that ascended to a bridge and the broad back of the
man who piloted the boat.
She guessed that between thirty to forty minutes had passed since they’d
snatched her from the guesthouse. And despite her panic, there had been
enough time for her to form some perspective on what was going down
tonight. Kat made a lot more sense now. The state of the woman at the
festival, the psychological collapse, was part of this. Kat had asked her to
come to Devon specifically for this and even provided her with
accommodation. She’d been set up.
What was wrong with people that they would do something like this?
And to a stranger who has already lost her brother? That’s what she’d
asked herself self-pityingly and what she’d asked of God, who she dearly
hoped was listening.
Kat’s desire for Lincoln’s discs was connected. But these men and those
red horrors were welcome to them. There was no need for any of this. She’d
have handed them over at the first sound of a raised voice.
There had also been ample time for her to suffer desperate thoughts of
home, of her daughter and her mum. Recurring thoughts of Valda
dominated and formed a heartbreaking loop. Helene had told herself not to
cry, not to lose it. She had to keep her head straight to reason with the men
who’d bound and gagged her and taken her out to sea in their boat . . . out to
sea, oh Jesus. She’d faint if she thought about that part too closely.
Perhaps they only intended to frighten her. Job done.

But once the hood was off, she did lose it. Only a thin fibreglass hull
now separated Helene and the sea, an alien region that you’d never see the
end of this far out. And her terror of that immensity of water and sky
returned. It was choking. No lifeguards, no shallow end out where she'd
been taken. Not much natural light with the sun sunk below the horizon.
She cried upon the fibreglass floor of the boat that smelled of oil, bleach
and the sea. Oddly, weeping helped, at first. But then crying tipped her into
hysteria and she flipped about the wet floor of the boat like a big fish that
her abductors had landed. She kicked both feet into the furniture, uselessly.
The pilot told the younger man, ‘Hold her still. Don’t want her chokin’
on her tongue. Nor gettin’ bumped about.’
With his long fingers that stank of tobacco, the younger man with the
alert eyes and sallow skin pushed her shoulders into the fibreglass deck.
‘I’ll sit on ya if you don’t stop,’ he said.
They’d gently placed Helene on the floor before setting sail and had
been very careful with any physical contact since they’d collected her from
the naked aborigines at the guesthouse. A strange consideration.
The third man in the red baseball cap and sunglasses wouldn’t look at
her at all. His face was pale. He stood at the stern, above the motor’s churn,
and looked out at nothing: there was nothing to see but black water and a
matching sky.
When the boat slowed, the engine thudding then whining like a food
mixer, Helene nearly threw up. The winding-down of the motor implied a
terrible finality. Only the rag between her jaws held nausea at bay.
‘Gag’s leavin’ marks,’ the younger man said. His fingertips were hurting
her shoulders. The youth was so frightened or excited that he probably
didn’t know he was bruising her skin. If not leaving marks had been an
objective, these men had failed.
‘Get it off her then!’ the pilot barked.
Surely they aren’t really going to hurt me. Her head seemed to clear,
momentarily. This cannot be real. They’re just trying to scare you. They
won’t . . .
And why was she even here? She was a single mum who lived in
Walsall, who worked part-time in an office. She’d never done anything to
deserve this. She’d come to Devon for the weekend to see people who knew
about her brother, who’d died years ago under his own volition. So why
was she out at sea, lying on the floor of a boat, bound and gagged? Because

of some old recordings that had been in her garage for half a decade? If the
CDs accounted for her current plight, they already had them. One of the red
things at the guesthouse, a woman with the hair oiled-out from her skull
like a scarecrow, had hooted and scampered up the stairs to retrieve
Lincoln’s discs and the laptop from Helene’s room. So them having those
discs didn’t make sense of her plight. Nothing did.
‘Why?’ she asked once the gag came off. ‘What have I done?’ Her
tearful voice was both too young and too old for her.
The man in the red cap clutched at the steel railing that ran around the
stern. Helene guessed he was struggling with the situation too: this plan, or
intention, that had been devised to terrify her, or to achieve something far
worse.
She remembered some of what she’d planned to say to them when she’d
been lying on the floor of the van. ‘People know . . . they know I was at that
hotel . . . I’ve used credit cards down here.’ She hadn’t, but how did these
men know? ‘There are emails and phone calls between me and Kat. I told
people where I was going!’
‘You’ll not have to worry about that bint,’ the pilot said, as he came
down the steps from the bridge heavily. His trainers expelled air as his
weight thumped down, whuff, whuff, whuff. He was the only one present
who seemed comfortable with the situation. A bald, stocky man with a face
that looked like ham moulded into porcine features. He wheezed like an
asthmatic but the suggestion of strength in his solid pink arms was
intimidating. She suspected he was trying to generate confidence to bolster
the resolve of the other two men. ‘She wunt be found.’
Helene flinched when the younger man shrieked like an animal: the
same sound the red people had made at the guesthouse. Naked, barefoot,
howling.
‘Not ’ere!’ the older man said. ‘That don’t concern the sea. Only the red
earth. She ain’t for that.’
‘Please,’ Helene said.
The men still wouldn’t look at her, not in the eye.
She swallowed. ‘I have a little girl. She’s only six. She needs me . . .’
Her voice broke.
The man in the red cap in the stern dipped his head and spat over the
side of the boat. His younger comrade grinned. There were tiny spittle balls

around his whiskery mouth. His pulse thumped inside his throat. The eyes
in his thin face were those of a confused dog.
‘Don’t got ya sea legs, Phil!’ the bald pilot shouted at the man in the red
cap. Then he whispered ‘Soft cunt’ to Helene, grinning as if they were
friends sharing an observation about a mutual acquaintance.
Helene didn’t think the pig captain was sane. There was something
wrong with his reaction to the situation, to her being so upset and distressed
and frightened on the floor of his boat. He had no empathy or pity. He
regarded her plight with an air of amused indifference as if he couldn’t take
her circumstances seriously. Job needed doing, that sort of vibe. He wanted
the onboard atmosphere to be light and seemed disappointed by the lack of
camaraderie.
‘S’not right!’ Phil in the red cap blurted. ‘Not this!’
‘Fuck off!’ the ham-pilot shouted at his comrade. His piggy eyes
reddened and he might have been on the verge of dispensing violence about
the small craft. An unstable man, perhaps even more unhinged than the
grinning, twitching youth. ‘The red not bin good to you, aye, Phil? You was
fuck-all when it crept round your door. Think we don’t all sin you
scratching about? A pisshead? Your dad woulda lost his farm, everyfing.
You was no help to fucking no one. You tellin’ me this ain’t worth what you
has? Fuck off. You do your bit same as all. Ain’t that right, Richey? Don’t
see him puking when he’s driving that Range Rover, aye. That bit he’s
happy with.’
The thin head of the younger man bobbed in agreement. His eyes were
permanently startled now, unable to rest upon any single thing.
‘You fuckin’ enjoy it!’ the man in the red cap roared.
‘You watch your mouf. None a that. None a that. Or I’ll put you over
too.’
Oh God, they’re going to throw you over the side. Arms and legs tied. At
that moment, Helene sensed the excoriating froth of the sea in her throat.
Saw herself coughing as a wave covered her face.
‘Won’t fool nobody, you stupid pig-headed fucker!’ Phil in the red cap
yelled. ‘She just told ya. People knows she’s down here.’
‘Messing with your head. They’ll say anyfing when they’re caught. You
seen them go into the red, ain’t ya? Hear it free or four times more and it
don’t mean nuffing. They goes in the red and we is gifted. No more to it
than that. Stop complicating fings. What’s it matter anyway? You sin what’s

coming to all of them, aye? But not us. Who you wanna be, them or us? Old
witch-wife opened your eyes, so why is you closing them again?’
‘They . . . they got forensics and things. When she washes up . . . They’ll
know. They’ll know!’
‘Reason why others do the thinking in the red is cus you’re a stupid
cunt, Phil. You fink she’s the first? The red’ll keep us, no worries. We’ve
coppers, councillors, twats and all sorts on our side. Red goes deep. You
ain’t breaking no rules when you is making them. Aye, Richey?’
Richey nodded along and added his own self-convincing spiel. ‘Deaf by
misadventure. Or suicide, like her brother. One or t’other. It’s fixed, Phil.
It’s all fixed up.’ But the younger man had wet himself. Near her face,
Helene could smell urine soaking into denim.
‘But if you wobbles, yeah? Yeah?’ The pig pilot was directing his sole
attention to Phil again, who would not turn around from the black sea, as if
he couldn’t. He just stood still and stared at where she was going. ‘If I fink
you’re a liability, yeah? Then when it gets back to you know who, yeah, and
it gets passed up to the witch-wife, yeah? Then when she gets queened up,
you’ll be capped. I promise you that. I’ll do it meself. You’ll be in the red
before you know it and I’ll piss on your bones too, or whatever the Creel
leaves down there. You’re a waste of space, Philly. Always was. I vouched
for you but I’ll be just as happy to see you go froo, yeah? Down there,
yeah? Froo the walls. Cunt.’
Phil slumped at the railing.
‘So git over here and fucking help out!’ The captain of pigs then turned
his attention to the youth, Richey. ‘You grab her legs. We go froo the back
and she’s in, yeah? Don’t let her bang the sides, like. Take the rope off her
arms as she goes in, yeah? Last minute, like.’
Easy to believe that you’ll have something to say at the end too, when
all hope has gone. That you’ll impart memorable last words. But it’s not
true. People become vague. They call for their distant mothers. Things like
that. Helene understood this. The last of you was mostly useless. But she
did briefly inflame from her toes to the ends of her hair. A bit of her former
self that gave boyfriends hell resurfaced.
‘No!’ she screamed. The nonchalant way in which the swine captain had
imparted instructions for her disposal into the sea had burned out an inner
firewall between her fear and rage. Anger scorched, loosening her muscles.

She swivelled on her buttocks and kicked both feet, as hard as she could,
into the stout trunk of the captain’s nearest leg. Right on the knee.
The hinge joint clicked back, locked and he roared, slipped sideways.
One fat hand scrabbled across the table like a corpulent sea snail, failing to
gain purchase. He thumped against the floor and found himself lying
alongside Helene, sweating hard with his face so red his heart must surely
burst.
‘Fuck’s sake, fuck’s sake, fuck’s sake,’ Phil repeated as he walked up
and down the tiny deck outside the cabin.
Richey grinned like the idiot that he most surely was.
The captain gasped, struggled to his knees but made sure to put his
weight on the one that Helene hadn’t kicked. ‘Bitch,’ he said, his mouth
filling with saliva. ‘Kill ya!’
‘No marks, no marks!’ Phil shouted as he finally ducked inside the
cabin.
‘I’ll have ya. I’ll have ya!’ the captain shouted, clawing pudgy digits at
Helene’s hair.
Phil and Richey dragged her away, out and onto the deck.
Cold air drenched her body: mere warning that the ocean itself would be
far colder. ‘God, no. My daughter . . . No. My little girl needs her mum. No.
Please. Please.’
Phil began to cry. ‘Nothin personal. It’s nothin personal,’ he chanted.
Richey took control and was horribly strong for a scrawny youth. His
hands passed under her armpits and he hoisted her upwards. Helene kicked
her feet about the deck, her trainers squeaking without finding grip.
And there it was. Black, slopping, stretching for ever. The sea. The
unfeeling, unseeing sea that would suck her down into non-existence, into
the depths where she’d never see her baby again. ‘No! Stop! Oh, God.
Please!’
A lazy pummelling of small waves shifted the boat about queasily.
Indigo patches the colour of her daughter’s blackcurrant juice were spotted
near the boat’s lights. The reek of brine engulfed her. The cold bit her nose.
Her body lost its strength and flopped limp. Feeling sick, weak and dizzy,
she thought she’d pass out.
‘Not yet,’ she said, feebly, finally, her voice distant amidst the shock she
was slipping into.

‘Get her in! Get her fuckin’ in!’ the oaf captain shouted, his pig face a
lather of spit and sweat at the mouth of the cabin.
Valda, running through a sunlit garden. Her face one big smile. A
melting ice lolly in a small hand.
Valda: a baby on her zoo mat, little feet kicking at the mirror and bells,
tiny hands whizzing with excitement.
Lincoln, smiling, his hair tousled.
Mum, Dad.
The binding was cut from her elbows.
One of them, Richey or Phil, was panting as if he’d run a marathon. She
didn’t want to see their faces.
There was no going back.
A hand grabbed her ankle and began to pull that leg from the slippery
deck. A second hand scraped down her calf, trying to seize her second
ankle. They meant to tip her in, over the back of the boat, headfirst.
Helene seized the railing and kicked her free leg backwards, blindly.
Catching Phil’s groin. He collapsed against a moulded bench. She raked a
hand behind, found Richey’s face. A cold, rubbery ear, wet lips, a stubbly
cheek. He pulled away, out of reach, his dirty fingers releasing her hoodie.
But what happens now? They going to take you back to shore? All a big
mistake? Soz, love.
No. The pig captain was on deck, with a limp and a complexion like
roast beef. Clutched in his hateful swine hands was a long wooden pole that
ended in an iron spike. Boathook.
Helene didn’t consider what she did next. She acted before her
conscious mind processed the impulse. Riding a surge of unreason, she
passed into a weightless euphoria and she stepped up and onto the stern of
the boat.
She turned her head and called the fat man ‘Bastard!’ through bared
teeth. And without any further assistance from the crew, she plunged into
the black sea.

24
When Sheila finally called, Kat’s captors crowded her, their fingers
whitening around the razor flints they held at her jawline. She still did not
know their names. They were close to being as unfamiliar to her now as
when painted red and pushing inside her home. Grief and horror and fear
kept her compliant because they’d dehumanised her. All she could do was
confer the same treatment on them, so in her mind and until this was over
she would call them Beard and Headscarf.
Both of her jailers possessed a high boredom threshold: she’d worked
that much out. They either watched her or watched terrible television, each
activity undertaken without comment, and though it was never difficult to
assume that they disliked her, they rarely conversed with each other and
never smiled.
Kat suspected that old Tony Willows, or whoever called the shots at his
unwholesome farm, had told Beard and Headscarf to dislike her. For the
kind of people who could ecstatically dismember a living man and feed him
to dogs, such a command seemed sufficient justification to hate someone.
Not once since they’d taken over her life and home had she seen a
flicker of empathy in their hard eyes. They didn’t see her. Not plainly. They
didn’t perceive her distress, and their absence of sympathy horrified her.
She’d never met the likes of them before but she’d always known that they
were out there.
As the uncomfortable cohabitation progressed through a third night,
Kat’s thoughts sank deep enough to become still, emotionless and blank.
They’d periodically resurface in shallower cerebral water, then sink again.
And so she’d slept, wept and slept some more.
They’d established a routine, the three of them. Kat washed in front of
the strangers, slept in front of them, picked at food while they stared and
even used the toilet in front of the woman. Beard let her close the door as if
afraid of being disgusted. The woman put clothes out for her each morning.
The man mostly watched television.

And when Sheila called, the bearded oaf had delivered Kat’s phone and
issued his usual crude warning. During the call even Sheila was
uncomfortable and desirous of an end to a conversation she’d never wanted
to be part of. Kat remained uncommunicative. Her mind blanking. What
could she say anyway?
Acceptance that Steve had gone into the sea was growing out there
beyond her confinement. It didn’t look good. That was clear from Sheila,
even if she balked at using drastic terminology. Her boss also mentioned
work and told Kat that she should ‘take as much time as she wanted in a
difficult time’. Upon hearing that, Kat sensed that Sheila had not only
written off Steve but her as well. She could afford to, and Kat might only be
problematic henceforth in Sheila’s rarefied world. Tragedy did not become
the brand values of Devon Life and Style. Kat was never going back to
work.
There’d be an obituary for her in the magazine, nothing depressing. Kat
sniggered at that thought, which confused her captors. They’d never seen
her laugh before and exchanged glances.
She was losing it.
Kat just didn’t feel like herself any more. In what time she’d left she
didn’t expect to.
She’d often pondered how trauma incubated deep below the surface of
the conscious mind to create transformation. Bits of the cerebral flotsam
rising from wreckage repressed in the sea trenches of the head, buoyant
fragments bobbing into more self-aware waters. Random floating signals
were examined as shards from some greater puzzle. The debris offered an
indication of how the mind was changing below.
Perhaps the mind altered to a more anxious state, or a less optimistic
one, as it slid into a depressed period weighted by disappointment. It might
find scant relief in wisdom or acceptance. But sometimes it became
irretrievably broken. And maybe only then did it prepare itself to act in
desperate ways.
In captivity, under house arrest, Kat also found time to think and to
identify a connection between her ex’s controlling moods and her current
situation.
Damage inflicted by Graham was permanent but had been manageable
over time. When they’d been together, his passive aggression had surfaced
whenever decisions were made about their evenings out, or whom they

would see as a couple, or what they bought together, or when deciding what
to do on a Sunday in London before the pressure of work refocused their
minds by late afternoon. Graham had always sulked or brooded Kat into
submission. She’d detested that side of her ex, a manipulative man and, she
knew, in hindsight, despite his undemonstrative manner, a selfish bastard.
Yes, he’d been conflicted for years and torn himself apart over the final
act of betrayal but he’d still left her alone and forced her to reconstruct a
life without him. That had taken a long time. He’d broken every promise
he’d ever made. Annihilated her trust in others. Ruined her fertility and
scorched her mental health.
But maybe Graham had done her one favour: he’d left Kat strongly
averse to anyone who tried to impose their will upon her. Anyone who
nibbled at the periphery of her life and attempted to appropriate her space,
her freedom, her emotions, she quickly detested. She suspected she’d
developed a phobia about commitment and a myriad other feelings of
repulsion for the wilful, the ambitious and the self-interested. Once bitten in
half, forever shy.
She’d only wanted to cruise down here by the coast. Yet here she was
again, this time with her hatred of being controlled maximised, magnified
and multiplied. A couple of thugs this time: deranged, degenerate bullies
who’d taken part in the slaughter and butchery of her lover.
Beard and Headscarf controlled her completely. Everything she’d
worked for was effectively theirs now. They’d just taken it from her and
could end her life too: the very workings of her mind and heart could be
gone any time they wished. That was their plan, assuredly, because her
current circumstances represented only a temporary delay before they
destroyed her tactically and purposefully. They had their reasons for
postponing the inevitable. She had no say in the timing or the method.
By day three Kat was comforting herself with visions of Tony Willows’s
farm on fire. She fantasised about her guardians having their own red heads
smashed in too. Cracked right open.
She also comforted herself with the idea of seeing them all sucked into
the black crevice, that void under the dirty floor, a place she could not think
about for more than fleeting moments. The stench of what had stalked
below was still trapped inside her sinuses.
Over the years, she’d also fantasised about Graham dying. Many times.
Usually first thing in the morning. Less so now, but in these fantasies he’d

never been destroyed by her own hand. She’d favoured imaginary
surrogates to claim her revenge: buses, accidents, muggings. Kat had
sickened herself while entertaining these pipe-dreams, and her new
fantasies about her jailers also troubled her. They stemmed from the
damage her tormentors had already inflicted upon her mind. Permanent
harm again, no doubt.
So what kind of person was she now? And what could such a person do
unto others if given the chance?
Kat was finally thinking about herself, about what she might do –
because unless she managed to extract herself from her current situation,
she’d die like Steve. And this posed the questions: how could she escape?
How was that done? The self-extraction: how was it possible?
Only on day four did Kat happen upon an idea she thought was feasible.

25
The cold was sharp. It cut subcutaneously. It withered.
The dive took Helene deeper than she’d anticipated, to where the cold
seemed capable of peeling skin and hair from her head.
Underwater, the roar that came from breaking through the surface was
deafening. A layer of ice seemed to form about her entire body, an
encasement of aching cold that burned and thumped the breath out of her
chest. Her insides shrivelled.
When the momentum of her plunge slowed, a terrible silence rushed in
from the freezing darkness surrounding her.
You never jump into cold water.
She’d not had much choice.
Cold-water shock. Down here, the involuntary gasp was the killer. The
drowner. Sea water chilled in layers. The surface layer was closer to the sun
by day but that was only a few feet deep. Further down, the temperature
plunged. A metre down the temperature might be zero degrees. At night, in
early summer, even the uppermost layer racked a warm body with shudders.
And she’d just arrowed a couple of metres into the black region that is
home to panic, gasping and the strength passing from your blood and into
the water. Half a pint of seawater inside your lungs and you’re done. Dead
in three minutes. Helene had punched into the black freeze with her eyes
wide open.
She knew how it worked: you were supposed to gradually accustom
yourself to cold water, one inch at a time, breathing quickly. She’d swum
for years and never thought her local pool warm enough, but in this ebon
sea, kicking an iceberg would not have been unexpected.
Too deep.
Too deep.
Too deep.
The alarm in her mind chattered. Panic flicked a switch in her animal
brain. Her mouth opened to inhale. The rapid beat of her heart sent out a
distress sonar.

Anyone less experienced would have sucked her lungs full of the caustic
brine and filled her tanks with the watery choker, the ice-cold killer. And as
her dive bottomed, something, some nihilistic impulse, some internal nurse
with a euthanising syringe stuck into an ampoule, even offered an
alternative to her shrieking desire to survive. In an inappropriately calm but
natural tone, the impulse had communicated the thought: why not let go?
Get it over with.
She refused. Valda’s small inquisitive face appeared in her thoughts,
how it looked first thing in the morning. And she thought of her child’s soft
body strewn across her lap on the sofa once Valda had pried her mum out
from under the duvet and made her go downstairs to watch cartoons. Helene
even heard a small voice asking, ‘Is the time six past twenty-five yet?’
Turning her fingers up and kicking hard, Helene had seconds to surface.
Any longer and her mouth would widen and that would be that.
She clawed at the bubbles of her wake. They blossomed silvery in an
eternal black. Employing her entire will, she overrode panic just enough to
keep her lungs empty and broke from the cold, her face surfacing in
lightless air that felt thirty degrees warmer than the sea.
Separate from her mind’s stewardship, her body shuddered, her chest
panted and heaved at the air. Her skull was a warehouse fire, a combustion
of animal and childlike terror. She gulped the air her lungs were bruising
for, then floated onto her back.
Her skinny jeans and hooded top were soggy and heavy and seemed far
more cumbersome than they had any right to be. But she could float, yes,
for a little while. And while she floated she told herself that she needed to
calm down. Don’t think about anything, just calm down.
At the edge of her awareness, the boat’s motor grunted in the water and
she heard a voice call out, ‘Drown, you bitch!’ The pig captain.
As if in disbelief at what they’d just done, the thin silhouettes of Richey
and Phil watched from the stern in silence.

26
Kat's red roommates would split her skull or slice her throat if she made a
dash for the front door. And that’s what they’d expect: her fleeing and
screaming for the front. They were primed for it.
You go all or nothing for the door or a window and they’ll make sure
you never attempt it again.
They’d tie her down. She’d go from standard imprisonment to solitary
confinement in bonds. So the front entrance was out.
For a few hours on the evening of day four, Kat clung to the thin hope
that the disappearance of Matt Hull, Steve and Helene would draw the
attention of even the most understaffed, underfunded and half-assed local
police force.
She also drew some comfort from the idea that Tony Willows and his
“witch-wife”, who might even be the Jessica Usher mentioned in the
Wikipedia entry, were both spinning an awful lot of plates. Their body
count was unacceptable for the postcode.
Vague connections existed between each victim. And if Kat was to take
a tumble from the coastal path mere days after her boyfriend, adding herself
to a tally that included the two other people she’d recently associated with,
Matt Hill and Helene Brown, then such a cluster of accidental deaths and
apparent suicides was a risk that Tony and Jess probably weren’t willing to
take. Right now, she guessed she was more dangerous dead than alive.
They needed her to lie to Steve’s parents and the police, to throw them
off the scent. But for how long the stay of execution would last was the
mystery. Not that long, her gut told her.
Her jailers were fanatics enthralled by a mad, bloodthirsty cause. But
Headscarf was old and, judging by the headwear, seriously ill too. If the
situation arose, woman to woman, Kat believed she could deal with
Headscarf. She’d never overpower Beard though. He was a brute. When he
wasn’t looking at her, he was never more than a short charge from the front
door. He didn’t wash and she hadn’t known him use the toilet with the door
closed when she was awake. She’d never fight her way through Beard.

She couldn’t open a window and scream fire either. The windows were
locked and the small metal keys that unlocked them had been confiscated.
In any case, she wouldn’t have enough time to do it, and her one neighbour
was half-deaf and pushing ninety. Escape was only feasible once her
opponents had been dealt with indoors. An idea that was cause for much
light-headedness.
Kat reviewed potential weapons, because one had to be involved. Her
hands and feet would never be sufficient. And as her memory scrolled
through what was still within her reach – tweezers, a hairdryer and hair
straighteners, a crystal bowl filled with dried petals – she remembered the
spray.
Once, while working in Germany for a few days, in Hamburg, Kat had
purchased a weapon illegal in Britain. A small item designed for the
defence of women if they were unlucky enough to be attacked by predatory
men. This device was made of metal, painted yellow, cold to the touch and
about the same size as a lipstick: a small yellow canister of pepper spray.
She’d brought it back to London inside her luggage, stowed in the boot of
her car.
Around that time, two of her friends in London had endured assaults:
one inside a taxi, one at a bus stop. Back then, self-defence had been on her
mind. But she’d never tested the spray. For years at a time, she’d forgotten
that she still possessed it. Occasionally, when she was reorganising her
possessions, or having a clear-out, or when she moved house, she’d come
across the small metal cylinder. But she’d never thrown it away. Just in
case. So the spray must still be in her possession, inside her property.
Somewhere.
Where?
Kat had a vague memory of last seeing it in a wooden box she kept
under the bed that contained her odds and ends, her bric-a-brac: a travel
sewing kit, some old mobile phones, her passport . . . she couldn’t
remember what else. But the spray might be in that box.
If the spray was stored in the attic with the Christmas decorations and
abandoned hobbies, then it might as well have been buried in Australia:
she’d never get the hatch open or ladder down in time. But if it was in the
wooden box under the bed and she managed to find an opportunity to locate
it, Kat had to wonder whether the nozzle would work when she pressed it

with her finger. Did pepper spray have an expiry date? She’d bought it ten
years before.
When she’d purchased the spray, and whenever she’d come across it in
the past, she’d vividly remembered her schooldays. This was the very
reason why she'd hung onto it and why the idea of having the spray in her
hand began to glow like a soldering iron in her thoughts. School had taught
Kat what pepper did to human eyes.
In the dining tent on a school camp, an idiotic and immature boy called
Nigel Baxter had covered her plate in white pepper. When she’d blown the
pepper off, a dust cloud had filled her eyes and she’d been unable to see for
twenty minutes. Her eyes and nose and everything behind her face had
burned so fiercely that she’d secreted gloopy handfuls of clear mucus and a
torrent of hot tears through her nose and eyes. Her mouth, one of her friends
had said, resembled Geiger’s Alien.
She’d been helpless, insensible and possessed by panic and shame in
equal amounts. A true public humiliation she’d never forgotten, its memory
still made her face burn. A trainee teacher had led Kat to the toilets to wash
her face and eyes. They’d remained red and swollen for two days.
Nigel Baxter got away with it. She’d not told her teachers who had
sprinkled the white pepper on her white plate. At her school, ‘grassing’ on
the bullies and thieves guaranteed exile until the end of your school life. A
rule engraved in stone that helped no one except the thugs. After all, it had
been their rule: it was the bullies who had made secondary school feel like
prison, not the harassed teachers.
Nigel had actually fancied Kat. That’s why he’d laced her plate with
pepper. He’d even asked her out one year after the incident and Kat had said
no. But another girl, Olive Newman, had fancied Nigel and wanted him for
herself. Olive had been so incensed at Nigel's attraction to Kat that she’d
bullied her rival for the entire fourth year. Olive Newman’s campaign of
terror only ceased when Olive was expelled for stabbing another girl in the
hand with a pair of craft scissors.
Back then, Kat had believed that if the dozen or so male and female
thugs in her year, like Nigel and Olive, had been killed on their way to
school, then the other two hundred children in her year would have been
much happier people, then and now. Or even just happy.
But that kind of justice was rare. If such just deserts occurred they
happened by degree and the reckoning was always too slow; it failed to

restrict the number of damaged victims the bullies subsequently racked up.
Justice should be far swifter, Kat decided, and the thought no longer
troubled her.
There have been too many people like this in your life, girl. They’re all
still with you, inside. They’re unforgettable. They like that. They like to
make an impression and for their influence to linger. It’s all they have of
you.
You’ve run as far as you can.
Running was always a good option. When you cannot do unto others
what they are doing to you, you have no choice: you leave, you run. But
what happens when you can’t run any further?
Kat told Headscarf that she felt unwell.
She and Beard had just opened a large bottle of cider.
Kat told them that she wanted to go to bed.
They seemed pleased with that.
She went to bed and stayed awake with her eyes closed.
***
Much later, Headscarf’s bird feet descended the stairs, the sound muffling
as the woman reached the ground floor.
At the edge of Kat’s hearing came the squeak of rubber soles as
Headscarf turned on the kitchen lino to open the fridge door. Neither of her
captors had taken their shoes off indoors. Another black mark. Kat had
always forbidden outdoor footwear indoors.
In the past, when one of her captors had broken their surveillance of
Kat’s bedroom to use the bathroom, or to smoke in the kitchen – those black
marks just kept adding up – the other one had come upstairs and watched
Kat from the doorway. By day four they’d stopped doing that. They never
left her alone for long but the guard was no longer as vigilant.
The windows were covered and the kitchen doorway was close to the
front door, so they were confident that she’d never get out that way. They’d
also probably assumed that their prisoner was so devastated and cowed, and
she was both of those things, that she was unlikely to offer resistance to
their guardianship.
But time was ticking.
Kat shuffled to the edge of her mattress.

The bed was noisy. Movements upon it registered in the living room,
directly below her bedroom. Even when moving slowly the bed issued
protest.
Kat paused and caught her breath.
In the kitchen the kettle conveniently boiled.
She swung her head over the side of the bed and peered underneath. She
saw a dozen pairs of shoes, lined up like a phalanx of leather-armoured
troops, bristling with buckles, patent straps, tipped heels. Behind them were
three opaque plastic crates. One contained bank statements and financial
records. Another was filled with the equipment and clothes she’d bought for
her sole camping experience with Steve. The third box contained notepads,
her diaries and a collection of self-help books. There was a duvet under
there too, a sleeping bag, three soft animals her ex had given her. She’d
hidden those from Steve and been unable to decide whether to keep them or
to give them to charity. Perhaps you’ve hung on to the pain?
But near the foot of the bed, in one corner, half-covered by a spare duvet
cover, was the wooden chest. Not ideally placed: that part of the bed was
closest to the door where her captors had positioned the stool. But at least
the box was close to an edge. She wouldn’t need to reorganise the stuff
around it. That would make too much noise.
Footsteps on the stairs.
Kat swung her body up, turned about on the bed.
Once her head was on the pillow she made sure to face the other way.
And breathed out slowly.
Headscarf resumed her position on the stool. Slurped coffee from Kat’s
Elle mug. A memento. Kat closed her eyes and thought of another memento
from Hamburg.

27
The great black canopy of night frightened Helene as much as the plain of
water she floated upon like driftwood. The sky was vast. The stars frozen at
an incredible depth. She pictured how tiny her body would look from far
above. That didn't help.
Don’t look up, don’t look down. Don’t think up, or down. Think straight
ahead.
At least a minute had passed since she’d surfaced. Her heartbeat and
breathing had slowed. ‘Relax. Relax. Relax . . .’ she said to herself through
chattering teeth. She unbuttoned her sopping jeans and pushed them over
her hips. Her pants went with them. Who gives a shit?
She went under twice. The jean-legs had turned inside out and she’d
gone under water to pull at the denim with all her might to stretch and tug
each leg from each foot. While under the water she’d seen nothing in any
direction. All was black as pitch and she couldn’t tolerate more than a few
seconds below the surface, the cold immediately making her desperate to
take a new breath. Her jeans eventually floated beside her like a pet with
long ears that didn’t want to be left alone.
Without jeans she felt especially insubstantial but at least her legs felt
freed in the water and more agile. But they were much colder too and she
wondered if she would have done better to leave her jeans on for the
smidgen of warmth they provided. She kept her hooded top on just in case it
might assist her survival. She kicked her feet to stay afloat.
The water’s fairly calm. At least there’s that.
Currents? We don’t know about currents. Don’t think about currents.
You’ve enough on your plate.
Gotta move or you’ll slow down. Slow arms, slow legs in cold water . . .
no no no. Can’t have that.
Once panic no longer filled her mind, her daughter inevitably returned to
her head. It was as if Valda had just walked into the kitchen casually
seeking her mum, or padded into her bedroom expectantly to see what mum
was doing. Her little face smiled inside Helene as if an activity could be

instigated, a treat negotiated from out of the cupboard above the
microwave, or a hug received.
Helene started to cry. ‘Baby . . .’ she said once.
Then she was angry and screaming, ‘You bastards!’ into the sky. That
felt better. Much better than thinking about her girl not having her any
more.
She’ll have to live with Mum and her arthritis until she goes somewhere
else . . .
‘No. No. My baby . . . She’s my baby.’
Parents die all the time.
‘Not this one. No, no. Not this one.’ Helene spat out sea water. She’d
sunk a bit and the gentle chop of the waves had lapped her face.
Helene looked towards land. In the far distance and in the direction the
boat had gone (the vessel was now a trio of white specks in distant
darkness), Helene could see a messy crescent of white light, maybe
Brickburgh harbour. But where those lights originated was too far away to
swim for.
South of the harbour, a few lights pinpricked the hills above a shoreline
unlit and invisible. Maybe that was the stretch of coast she’d walked. A few
farms dotted those hills. How far across the water from here to there? Two
or three miles. Maybe more.
But swimming in the sea was not like swimming in chlorinated water.
The sea was much thicker. It moved more, ever surging with waves and
currents. Moving through it was harder work and it stole more of your
energy. And there was the cold. In Britain the water temperature rarely
peaked at twenty degrees in a hot, late summer. This was May. She
reckoned she was treading water with a temperature nearer one or two
degrees around her knees. If the cold overcame her, her blood would retreat
to her core and her arms and legs would stop working and become sluggish.
She’d drown. She already felt like she was wearing a shower cap and facemask moulded from ice.
But once horizontal she’d be swimming in marginally warmer water,
maybe by a few degrees at the surface: water less bloody freezing than it
was around her feet and knees while bobbing vertically. A few degrees
might make all the difference.
Swim steady. Not too fast.
Go.

Helene began to breaststroke to accustom her body to moving in cold
water, to get the blood moving through her muscles again. She wasn’t ready
to dip her face and ears into the black freeze to do a front crawl. Backstroke
was her third favourite stroke but a straight trajectory was hard to maintain
and she couldn’t, at any cost, afford to go off course while swimming on
her back.
However she swam, if she hit a strong current she knew she was done. If
the wind picked up and she was swimming up and down the chop she
doubted she’d be able to swim for more than half a mile, and only that far if
she didn’t freeze first. Her extremities, her feet, hands and nipples, already
ached. If a cramp crept into her feet it was over.
Don’t!
Valda and the lights. Valda and the lights. Valda and the lights.
She chanted this inside her skull to quell the other thoughts that were as
cold as the night. At the same time, stretching out her long body, Helene
began a front-crawl in the direction of land.

28
Kat continued to feign sleep. But wasn’t Headscarf bored? For two hours
she’d sat upon the stool outside the doorway, vaguely peering into the
darkened bedroom where Kat lay. In an age where people were constantly
wiping their fingers up and down screens or prodding them, Kat thought
this remarkable. Downstairs, the television muttered. And how could
anyone stand that much bad television?
The couple had been charged with an important task; they’d been
chosen. Maybe the unimaginative made the best killers whether they sat
behind a desk or held a rock in their red paws.
Only at midnight did Headscarf finally dismount the stool, with a faint
creak, to use the bathroom. She didn’t close the door, only pulled it to. Bitch
is good.
Kat immediately slipped her body down the mattress to the foot of the
bed, to get closer to the position of the box beneath the bed-frame. But the
noisy chaos of compressing springs and squeaking wood soon brought the
manoeuvre to an end. She visualised Headscarf tensing in the bathroom,
with her pants round her ankles, listening intently to the distant percussion
of the bed.
Kat pushed back to her former position.
Whether the two occurrences had been connected she didn’t know, but
after the bed creaked the taps briefly ran in the bathroom. Within moments
of placing her head on the pillow, Headscarf’s bony face was peering
through the doorway, staring at her inert body beneath the duvet. The
creature then resumed its sitting vigil.
So close.
***
Kat was dozing when the guard was changed. Without a word, Beard
assumed ownership of the stool at 2 a.m.

At 3 a.m., when she was fighting hard to stay awake, he went
downstairs. Moments later the kettle boiled, the fridge door opened, then a
cupboard. As he looted her kitchen and made preparations for coffee, his
phone rang. She didn’t hear what was said but Beard’s hoarse voice gruffly
barked brief statements at the caller. He even laughed for the first time in
four days.
Kat had to assume that Headscarf was asleep on the couch. The
television had finally fallen silent.
She spread her body wider than before, face-down, and turned herself
upside down beneath the duvet. She had to stay on the mattress, couldn’t
risk the sound of her feet on the old floorboards. When the coverings
blocked her hearing, she pulled the duvet from her head to listen.
Silence in the kitchen, save the final gurgles of the electric jug
approaching the boil.
She waited, motionless, fearing that if she was found in this position
with her head at the foot of the bed, she’d struggle to convince Beard that
she’d been having a restless night.
Another cupboard door was opened. Even a cunt likes snacks.
Kat reached over the end of the bed with one hand and found the
wooden box, the hinged lid and the nickel-plated locking mechanism
familiar against her fingertips. She swiped the catch free but the lid was too
close to the bed-frame to be raised, ruling out a search. The box needed to
be withdrawn from beneath the bed to enable a rummage for any toxic
treasure it might yet yield.
Footsteps on the kitchen lino. The squeak of training shoes.
Like the big hand of a clock, Kat returned the top half of her body to the
pillows, spreading her weight again. Still a noisy manoeuvre and the duvet
caught underneath her body.
Stairs creaked under Beard’s feet.
Kat fought the duvet, then straightened her body a moment before her
captor reappeared in the doorway, holding a steaming mug.
She was now lying on the other side of the bed and holding her breath,
hoping the new position merely suggested that she’d moved in her sleep,
perhaps switching sides to find cooler, less wrinkled sheets.
Beard resumed his seat.
Kat wondered if her heartbeat was audible. She didn’t know whether to
be disappointed that she hadn’t opened the box or relieved that she hadn’t

been caught with her head over the foot of the bed. They’d surely search
under the bed if she showed any interest in what was down there.
Thirty minutes later Beard’s buttocks slid off the stool again, heavily.
Deciding to sit on the floor, he leaned back against the short railing at the
top of the stairs. He closed his eyes.
Unsure if he was sleeping on the job or merely resting, Kat took stock:
the box needed retrieving from beneath the bed to enable a search and the
spray had to be tested. That process was asking for a lot of time. The bed
would squeak. Steady hands would be required for the latter part of the
procedure or she might blind herself.
Although Beard was the more formidable adversary physically, she’d
have to make her move on his watch. He was less attentive, went
downstairs more often and took longer to finish his business in the
bathroom. Prostate trouble was a possibility: a long silence always preceded
tinkling.
Time withdrew like a tide. Her stomach burned with frustration, so the
next time the Beard went downstairs she swore to herself that she would
open the box and then . . .
Whatever might happen then made her feel sick.

29
Helene must have been swimming steadily for fifteen minutes when she felt
the first glimmer of relief: a satisfaction that she hadn’t yet drowned by
succumbing to the cold.
She couldn’t fully feel her fingers and toes, her shoulders and neck had
stiffened, but by forcing awareness of her fatigue from her thoughts she’d
continued to chop at the water and to breathe steadily on the surface of the
heaving black.
Twenty more strokes, she repeated to herself and counted them. Resetting
her clock she then counted twenty more. With what capacity still remained
for imagination inside a skull filled with the noise of her exertions, she
pictured herself from above, cutting through the black water with the
purpose and speed of a ship’s prow.
For as long as she was able she refused to look up and ahead. The vast
distance between herself and the lights on shore remained too demoralising
to judge. She told herself that when she next checked she would be closer,
she would be encouraged.
When she did finally look up, the lights seemed no closer at all. In fact,
with nothing else to measure her progress, her mind tried to trick her into
believing that her body was, more or less, still in the same place she’d
entered the water. She suspected that a conspiracy of currents was pushing
her backwards and that she was merely rising and falling on the swell.
But the natural world and water were full of illusions and little beyond
the cold sea could make you feel so small, so futile and weak. She assured
herself of this. Maybe only an astronaut adrift in space would know her
dread.
When she’d been swimming for what she estimated to be half an hour,
she became aware that she wasn’t feeling as cold and was breathing more
easily. She was no longer tugging at the air and gulping it and spluttering it
out again. She’d reached a plateau, her optimum swimming time. She
recognised this stage from swimming in a pool. For a dozen lengths she
would feel ungainly, her strokes poorly coordinated and she’d swallow

water. But a rhythm and regular breathing would always evolve, hinting that
she could swim for ever. Only now would she truly discover how far and
for how long.
Small waves nudged her from every direction but she adjusted her
strokes and now inhaled on every third stroke rather than every other stroke.
This made her believe that she was going faster, with better technique.
When she judged she had been swimming for about as long as she’d
need in the pool of the leisure centre to cover one mile, she rested and trod
water. That meant she wasn’t doing anything but rising and falling with the
swell. And once again she thought of her daughter. But it no longer helped
to motivate her, because the lights onshore were still too far away and a
paralysing feeling of futility made her sob. Another waste of energy.
She thought of the pig captain’s ruddy face instead, grinning aboard his
little boat, and of his stooges, Phil and Richey. It was not right that creatures
like that could make her daughter an orphan. She wanted to believe that
they would be caught and punished. Surely they would be. Her mother
knew where she’d been staying . . . Carol would be questioned by the
police . . .
Helene then considered the statuette that had been sent to her daughter in
Walsall from down here. Kat had been the only person with her address but
who had she shared it with to put Valda and her mum in danger? Lincoln’s
recordings were only on disc but her tormentors didn’t know that. For all
they knew she had the cave noises on the hard drive of a machine at home
in Walsall. If they were prepared to go to these lengths for a handful of
CDs, then what might they do to retrieve a home computer?
Her daughter and mother were at risk. They were known to the people
who’d orchestrated her tortuous execution by drowning with added
hyperthermia. This, and a fear that she couldn’t feel her legs properly below
the knee, made Helene resume swimming. Only now she wanted to kill Kat
even more than the three men aboard the boat.
After each turn of her head to draw breath, Helene returned her face to
the eternal cold darkness beneath the surface, trickle-breathing from her
nose to expel air. Sometimes she grunted at the cold and she heaved at the
water out of fury, but she also understood that it was now getting harder to
think clearly, or to hold any thought in her mind for more than a moment.
This was exhaustion: from moving one arm after another, again and again,

from rotating her body from side to side, from remembering to kick both
legs hard. All of this was consuming her energy while the cold sapped it.
But up and down the small waves she went, kicking her long pale legs,
digging at the water with her hands. On and on. On and on.
Valda, Valda, Valda and the lights.
Valda, Valda, Valda and the lights.
Valda, Valda, Valda and the lights.

30
As the floorboards outside her room depressed beneath Beard’s feet, Kat
withdrew her hand from the disordered contents of the wooden chest. Her
arm shook so hard that she dropped the spray.
Bending at the waist, she scrabbled for the small bullet, seemingly
unable to retrieve it from the weave of the carpet. Angry with herself, at the
pitch where self-harm probably wasn’t far away, she lunged in desperation
and seized the container. Finally, she cupped the cold lozenge inside her
palm.
He’d been downstairs again, Beard. Had he not been so tardy and
sluggish on the stairs, he’d have caught her with the lid of her box open.
Kat inserted the metal capsule inside the pocket of her jogging bottoms.
With no time to enjoy the elation of retrieving the weapon she looked
down at the box that was no longer beneath the bed-frame.
Outside the room, a coffee mug was placed on top of the wooden stool.
Without having time to consider her action, Kat tugged the duvet part way
from the bed so it slumped over the open box and her bare feet.
A bearded face appeared in the doorway. ‘What you doing?’ His words
were thick with lassitude, boredom and sleep deprivation, his eyes red from
lack of sleep, too much screen-time and alcohol. They dropped to the duvet
on the floor.
‘Toilet,’ she replied, feigning a yawn to conceal the alertness that would
be visible in her expression under the landing light.
She shuffled towards the door. Beard stood aside but for several airless
moments Kat anticipated the rough leather of his hands on her arms. She
could practically hear him shouting, ‘What you got there?’ and reaching for
the bulge in her pocket. Was it visible? Kat covered it with a hand.
And then she was inside the bathroom with her back against the door
and a towel across her mouth to stifle her panicked panting.
She had the spray now, in her pocket. The spray! Using it on a human
face was another thing altogether but she’d got here little by little, inch by
inch. She’d bloody done it.

Bastards, she mouthed at the door.
She’d have to spray that hoary bearded face out there on the landing and
soon, at close range. The very idea made his body seem too large and dense.
There was so much of him. The tiny canister, not much bigger than a lipgloss tube designed for a woman’s clutch-bag, seemed especially pathetic.
What could it possibly do to that brute?
Even after all they’d done to her, what they intended to do, what they’d
done to Steve, Matt Hull, the others . . . Helene, they made you walk her
into certain death . . . she no longer seemed in possession of her previous
resolve: her determination to defend, to avenge.
Where had the fantasies of destroying them gone? Maybe they had been
nothing more than the desperation of the condemned.
Now she was frightened, not angry. Her muscles were boiled pasta gone
cold. Her heartbeat thumped inside her ears. This is what happened when
you’d been captive for too long, when they’d let you live for a bit. Hadn’t
she’d also begun to feel stupidly grateful whenever they brought her water
or tea and when they let her use her own bathroom?
Calm down. She had to calm down.
Kat sat on the toilet but was too scared to pee.
Beard hadn’t resumed his seat. She’d have heard the creak of his weight
on the wooden stool, even through a closed door. She was familiar with
these few sounds from her days and nights in captivity: her existence had
been reduced to a few feet of space and a meagre selection of noises.
Maybe he knew something was up, that she was behaving differently. A
weasel mind adapted that way. The merest alteration in a victim’s eyes and
they were alert, their instincts honed. They knew who to attack by the
posture of a person’s body. Murderers, kidnappers, fanatics: they thought
differently and she was trapped in their medium. She had to do it now.
Oh, God.
Kat stood up and ran a tap so Beard could hear something he might
associate with the innocent use of a bathroom.
The duvet was still on the floor of her bedroom. She saw it in her mind,
like a betrayer, a feather-filled Judas. If Beard poked beneath the duvet he’d
see the open box, a container full of old phones. Their batteries were dead,
the services and numbers disconnected. But how would he know that?
Inside her mental parliament, each side of the house rose and jeered at
the other’s suggestions. Her head was too busy, nothing seemed clear any

more. Get angry. This was her only opportunity. Get angry and be quick.
Because if adrenalin didn’t take her over, this plan would not work.
And then Beard forced her to act. Three noisy steps sounded on the
landing before he thrust open the bathroom door.
Kat was nearly grateful to him for forcing the inevitable. She’d needed
him to, or she would have remained pale, shaky and hopeless.
You’re all head, girl, no gut. Gutless, a little admonishing voice said
inside.
He had seen the duvet then. He thought she’d been up to something, her
sleepiness unconvincing. His eyes peered all over her, took in her hands.
Looked at the bath, the sink, the toilet beside her. He was looking for what
she’d just removed from the wooden chest.
Beard stepped into the bathroom, his stare fixed on her pockets. ‘Gimme
that phone!’ he roared. He’d seen the old mobile phones. There’d been at
least four inside the box.
Kat visualised his rough hand on her wrist before she could bring the
spray in play. You never tested it into the sink like you were supposed to!
The crevice in the dirty floor of the barn . . . Cap the bastard . . . that
idle hand, lifeless, chopped from a body by a sharp stone and left amongst
the spoor of livestock. A grooved human chin wet from feasting.
Kat backed into the sink. The rim indented her buttocks.
She thumped one hand outwards, fingers wide, into Beard’s sternum.
Her free hand scrabbled at her hip until her fingertips found the pocket
of her jogging bottoms.
Beard snatched her outstretched arm at the wrist. She pulled back with
all of her might and sat in the sink. A sudden sharp pain from the taps
pressing into her lower back stabbed some purpose into her mind. Kat
dipped her hand inside her pocket and the canister slipped into her palm.
Beard grasped her weapon arm below the shoulder. He didn’t prevent its
range of movement because he wanted to see what she held in her hand. He
suspected a phone, not a weapon.
‘See,’ Kat said. ‘Lip balm.’
Beard moved his face closer, eyes wide to identify what lay inside her
palm.
Kat’s index finger slipped into the groove intended for a woman’s
frightened finger. The top of the can was black and made from rubber. She

thought of how the pepper had burned her whole life away for twenty
minutes at school camp.
Watch for blowback.
‘’Tis that? What you got?’ Beard demanded.
And then his ruddy, veiny face and bulging eyes were engulfed by the
discharge of an aerosol. Small droplets cavorted in their thousands.

31
Mouth open to inhale, Helene caught another small wave in the face.
Engulfed by the shock of choking on seawater, she flailed.
Panic brought immediate clarity to her vision, electrifying her awareness
but failing to fully extend into her muscles. She was too weary, losing
rhythm: practised movements were heavier, clumsy, slowing. Her halfclosed eyes stung. The inside of her ears throbbed like thumbs beneath
misjudged hammer strokes. Her nose burned and tendrils of pain threaded
her sinuses. Her face might have been struck by a shovel carven from solid
ice.
Helene floated on her back to regain her breath, to ease the terror of the
wave flushing her mouth.
She calmed and discovered that the persistent anxiety about how long
she could swim worried her less than it had when she hit the water so long
ago.
She turned onto her tummy and began breast-stroking: slowly, her
shoulders screaming, but at least her head was more out of the water than
under it.
Ten minutes later she was sure she saw an object on the surface. A
moment later it appeared to be another head, some distance to her right. She
stopped swimming and trod water.
Peering about, she waited for a series of small waves to slope away and
reveal the dark blur facing her: a shape different in colour and form from
the surrounding air and water.
There. There it was again.
Helene struck out for it, losing sight of the object briefly before her
frantic vision rediscovered the dark sphere.
She lost it again in a trough. Then found it.
The fact that she took so long to reach the buoy when it had never been
far away was a fresh blow to her confidence about her progress. A fear of
swimming against a current or tide from the beginning made her body seem
twice as heavy. Maybe her sluggishness and the presence of the marker

signified a current. She didn’t know. She couldn’t read the symbols of the
sea.
Reaching the buoy, Helene engulfed the slimy sphere with her hands as
if it were her own child.
By pressing it down and under the surface she attempted to rest her chest
and chin upon it. At the first three clumsy attempts the buoy slipped
between her stiff white hands, bobbed up and away.
Beneath the surface a rope disappeared straight down, so she coiled her
legs around the mooring to keep the buoy still. Mussel shells encrusting the
rope cut rough and sharp against her calf muscles and ankles, but she kept
hold of the buoy.
Once clear of the water her shoulders and upper arms told her how much
they ached. Oddly, she no longer felt cold. That couldn’t be a good sign.
Not after she’d been in the water for so long.
Looking to the land, she could see that the distant hill lights still
appeared small. But the separation between the lonely vigil of one light and
its neighbour seemed much greater now, wider. If the lights were further
apart then she must be closer to land. These lights were not strung along the
shoreline. They were shining from buildings in distant hills. The coastline
must be some distance below and before the faraway beacons.
She had made progress. A lot of progress.
There was only a trace of illumination from the distant moon and no
light pollution along the coast. By concentrating her gaze straight ahead she
just made out the lumpy silhouette of a rocky coastline: an uneven line
barely distinguishable in the darkness. The rocks of the shoreline were a
lighter colour than the oily sea but still distant.
Helene pressed her face against the slippery buoy and wept for a few
seconds. She’d come so far. She’d come so close.
Further ahead of her she saw another buoy: dark and bobbing like the
head of another person in the water. Maybe twenty metres ahead.
Looking about herself she noticed another one behind her. Further to her
left she thought she could see another two.
Why they were there was a maritime mystery but she’d just swum across
two parallel lines of buoys anchored to the ocean floor by rope. And to
place her numb and wrinkled hands upon something manmade almost
kidded her, for a short time, that she was close to saving herself from the
sea.

But how far out in the water these buoys were and how far away the
distant, patchy suggestion of rocky land, she couldn’t accurately judge. And
what of her frozen body if she even managed to claw herself onto those
rocks? She knew she had little strength remaining and would be unable to
walk if she even made it ashore. Of that she was certain.
The end of her natural resources approached. The swim had kept her
afloat and active but merely reaching the first buoy had sapped what felt
like the very last of her strength.
She turned her weary face to the sky and then pushed herself away from
the buoy. She swam on her side in the direction of the next one.
Valda . . . Valda and the lights . . .
Valda . . . the lights . . .
Valda . . .

32
Hands with skin as hard as old shoe-leather clapped the outside of Kat’s
shoulders. Great paws cupped, crushed and yanked her upwards.
Torn from the sink, the top of her buttocks caught a tap spout. Panic
rioted inside her skull. Her strength fled, resolve following.
Had the canister only ejected a spraying agent and not a blinding
chemical? You’re supposed to shake it. Did I?
Beard had merely blinked under the aerosol’s deluge but barely slowed.
She must have squirted water from a dud. Use by date: the phrase screamed
at Kat accusingly. The hairy killer was not for slowing down.
He hauled her like a child across the bathroom, onto the landing. Pulled
about too forcefully to keep her feet, she went down. On her knees she said,
‘Please.’
She wasn’t sure what happened next but her attacker’s hands
unclenched, releasing her bloodless arms.
Looking through her hair at the floor, she was braced to receive a blow
from above when a roar of animal pain filled the entire cottage, vibrating
through timber and brick.
A glance up.
Not much of Beard’s head was visible. Inside a halo of wild, greying
hair and crispy beard, his thick-fingered hands clutched at his face. He bent
double, bellowed again. Tears dropped from his chin and splashed onto his
tattooed forearms.
Delayed effect.
Kat stood up.
Without giving notice of her approach, Headscarf appeared on the stairs.
She peered between the banisters, the rat-face inquisitive. ‘Wass wrong, E?’
she said. ‘Wass she done?’
Sprightly for a woman in her sixties, Headscarf skipped onto the landing
and grabbed E by an arm. ‘Lemme see,’ she demanded of him like a mother
before a son with something stuck in his eye. Maybe they were family.

‘Bloody spray!’ Beard roared, and spat gobs down his chin. ‘Fuck!
Fuck!’
Headscarf frowned, trying to comprehend, and Kat took two steps into
the melée and laced the woman’s face from close range. This time she
wiggled her wrist like she was a graffiti artist with a spray can tagging a
concrete bridge.
The woman stumbled back, lowering her face. ‘Bitch!’ She instinctively
thrust out a knobbly hand in defence, arthritic fingers gripping a black
hand-axe, before screaming from the agony engulfing her eyes and sinuses.
Kat dithered. Tried to remember her plan. It had been simple but her
mind blanked amidst the screams, the tears, the screwed-up faces, the flying
saliva.
Get past them and run.
She’d dosed them good but didn’t know how long the spray’s caustic
effects lasted. To make sure, she positioned the can under Beard’s covered
face as he spat and grunted at the floor, his head almost between his knees,
and discharged it again.
He pulled away violently and knocked Headscarf down. He carried on
capering and wheeling until his back hit the wall outside her bedroom.
Something like hope merged with delight and surged like electrical
current. Kat ran the last few feet of the landing. Tucked her body between
the roaring oaf and the staircase. One hand on the railing, on legs
unaccustomed to moving quickly, she padded down the stairs. The bright
ground floor of her home reappeared in her vision. The sight was blessed.
Hesitation gripped her again outside the kitchen. Her legs were shaking.
Her hands too. They had her car keys and her phone. That’s right, she was
supposed to retrieve those from her captors once she’d sprayed their faces.
In hindsight, that part, the spraying, seemed to have gone too smoothly.
Recovery of her car keys or phone, or preferably both, chimed new alarms.
Should she run from the house in the dark? How far would she get? She
wasn’t fit. Her neighbour was elderly and probably wouldn’t open her door
in the early hours. Further up the lane were another two cottages. Each
owned by elderly widows. Though one of them, Grace, usually had her
daughter staying over.
A quick survey of the kitchen counters and then the living room: the
sofa, the coffee table, the bookshelves and counters, revealed neither phone
nor car keys.

Kat returned to the hall and stuffed her feet into a pair of trainers. She
looked up. Beard was ranting, his broad West Country accent more
pronounced when in pain. The timbre of his voice alone was terrifying and
he was fumbling his way down the stairs like a blind man. One eye kept
trying to open before clenching shut again like a frantic red snail inside its
shell. But if that bloodshot orb managed to remain slightly open and the
pepper spray was too old to be effective for long, she’d be in all kinds of
trouble again and fast.
Kat unlatched the door and undid the mortice lock. The door handle had
little give. Locked. They’d removed the Yale key from the main lock.
The sounds of her scrabbling at the cottage entrance incited greater
efforts from Beard. He thumped his feet down the few remaining stairs. If
his cruel hands seized her now he’d just hang on. He’d make sure next time.
Half-finished job.
Kat side-stepped into her tiny kitchen. She glanced about: toaster,
breadboard covered in crumbs and dirty knives, dirty dishes, microwave,
dirty pans . . .
Panting, shaking his messy head, Beard angled his face down in case
gravity offered relief from the sting and clawed at the front door. He pressed
his hands against the wood and seemed relieved to find the door closed.
Clearing his nostrils onto her mat like a bullock, he realised that his
quarry was still indoors. The cottage was small. Even blind he’d find the
bitch.
With a clarity that made her grow cold, Kat understood that if he got
hold of her now he’d probably kill her where she stood. At the very least
he’d knock her senseless. And then . . .
Do unto others . . .
She opened two cupboards beside the oven. Food mixer, oven trays, bin
bags, tinfoil on a roll, clingfilm, but nothing to weaponise.
Cutlery drawer next. Kat opened it so fast the drawer reached the end of
its runners and snapped them. Beard must have heard the tinkle of sharp
metal things. He turned from the door and tried to force that ulcer of an eye
open. Kat stepped up to the kitchen doorway and re-sprayed his hoary face.
With a roar he tumbled backwards, escaping most of the fresh dose, but
a few droplets must have entered the puffy slit of his parted eyelid. His hips
struck the cabinet storing unopened post and racked shoes. A grasping hand
tore two coats down.

The can’s tiny load was nearly spent, the nozzle fizzing alarmingly
during the last despatch. And now she’d made him even angrier. Once this
conflict concluded one of them would not be getting up again. She
swallowed this revelation like bile. But with her advantage the idea also
excited her in a perverse, shameful way.
Kat retreated to the drawer that tilted out of the fitted kitchen unit.
Headscarf was washing her face upstairs. Kat heard the gush of a tap.
The wrinkled rat must have sunk its burning face inside the basin to stop the
pain.
Kat removed kitchen scissors from the cutlery drawer. Dropped them.
Snatched the small, sharp paring knife. Pocketed the weapon. Then grabbed
the wooden rolling pin she’d only used once in a disastrous attempt to make
pastry: a beef Wellington so dry and misshapen that she and Steve had been
forced to order takeout. They’d eventually laughed until they cried. ‘Can I
watch it go into the bin?’ Steve had asked. ‘Bastard!’ she’d called back at
him, helpless with laughter.
‘Bitch!’ Beard roared from the kitchen doorway like a bee-stung bear,
obliterating the brief echo of her dead lover. He knew she was in the kitchen
and was aware of the room’s tiny dimensions, its potential as a domestic
killing bottle. He’d been foraging in there for long enough, making endless
cups of coffee like a recovering alcoholic, and had smoked so many rollups
the room was now fungal from tobacco fumes. He’d made her space his
own and he would kill her upon its linoleum floor. Even with him blind, his
monstrous hands would still inflict catastrophic damage: they were tree
roots wrapped in moleskin capable of crushing a windpipe like a bunch of
spring onions. She was cornered.
From the back pocket of his jeans he pulled a flint hand-axe. His hairy
mitt cupped it, point down, as if he intended to hammer something hard.
Steve.
Kat remembered the sounds of Steve’s body coming apart in the dirt.
Beard stepped inside the kitchen.
Kat stepped up to him. And brought the wooden rolling pin down so
hard and with such a wild swing she clipped the kitchen light. It shattered.
Glass and the metal casing showered the floor. But the arc of the makeshift
club, this comedy weapon that seemed to have passed from a Tom and Jerry
cartoon and into her hands, connected with Beard’s head. She caught him
where the simian forehead sloped.

He grunted, dropping his head, feet planted.
Vibrations passed along Kat’s arms. The wooden pin had bounced off
his skull with an almighty coconutting sound that made her feel sick, the
impact suggesting his head was a hollow wooden vessel.
A bright streak of blood bisected his face, passing between his swollen
eyes and around his flat nose to creep through the untidy moustache.
Tributaries of crimson spread through his hairline. Kat’s nausea slid from
six to ten.
Beard clumsily swiped his arm through the air, the hand-axe at its end.
Whisking the air, the weapon passed no more than a few inches from her
eyes. It would have opened her face like a sandwich.
Dizzy, panting like a dog on a hot day, Kat's thoughts fell about inside
her mind like drunks. She really wanted this to stop. You made him bleed.
Sprayed him three times. Why won’t he fucking stop? Why won’t they all
fucking die?
This is your house! They killed Steve . . .
Upstairs, Headscarf was sniffing and jabbering. To herself? No, because
the old woman had climbed the stairs with a phone in her hand. But would
she be able to see the screen and activate a call with her eyes clenched shut?
Or maybe she’d already initiated a phone call to one of her colleagues
before she’d run up the stairs?
Beard shuffled about trying to regroup his wits inside the earthquake Kat
had just dropped onto his skull. He readied himself for another swing that
would swipe deeper inside the tiny room. One of his big arms pulled back, a
fleshy catapult, determined to tear her soft body apart with a primitive
implement, the tool that had reduced her lover to wet pieces on a grubby
floor that stank of animal shit. And that’s all they were now: savages
swinging sharp stones and clubs at each other inside a soiled cave.
Kat stopped thinking, stopped informing herself, stopped hoping,
stopped despairing. ‘You dirty bastard,’ she screamed and went at Beard.
The second, third and fourth blows were easier to deliver against his big
head. Kat pulled down more of the light and some ceiling paint and plaster
with her back swings but she caught the top of his head, the side of it above
an ear and then the back of his skull.
Beard blindly thrust out an arm in defence and she battered that too,
twice, until it was withdrawn. She only stopped swinging when she was too

tired to raise her arms and when her horror at herself overcame what had
felt like elation as she’d destroyed the intruder.
Beard’s head was wet, darker, dripping. He was less vocal. Truly one of
the red folk now, repainted by her and brought down by one of their own
notorious techniques. It all seemed to fit.
Beard slumped against the washing machine. His mouth moved.
Nothing much came out of it, nothing intelligible. As he’d turned from her
blows she’d seen the oblong outline of a smartphone in the rear pocket of
his jeans. He was now sitting on the device.
‘E! E! You get her?’ Headscarf shouted from the top of the stairs, in
between sniffs and expulsions from her nostrils.
Not done yet.
Kat stepped over Beard’s legs. One of his feet scraped purposelessly
against the lino, his head leaking horribly. But Kat continued up the stairs to
deal with the old woman who would still be half-blind. No one gets left
behind. And then she’d need her phone and she’d need the police here fast.
As Kat jogged the last few stairs, Headscarf fumbled her way into the
bedroom, slapping her hands about the walls, directing orders at someone
she couldn’t even see. ‘Get away, bitch! Get away! I got the cancer. I’m ill.
Don’t hurt me!’ She clutched a phone in one hand. The screen was glowing.
She’d called someone.
Kat clenched her teeth and raised the wooden club in her hand. We’re all
monsters here. We’re all red now.

33
. . . the lights
As she closed the distance between the first and second buoy, the lack of
sensation in Helene’s arms and legs made her think of waterlogged timber.
Using one arm to slowly claw forward, she tried to swim on her side, but
a scissor kick proved too much for her numb legs and they drifted like dead
weight. A tourniquet of bruise now encircled her neck and her lower back.
Halfway across, she went under, twice.
Slipping under shocked her enough to force her arms to reach and grasp
the second buoy. When her head nudged the hollow plastic sphere she
managed to cling to it with half-paralysed hands.
Valda . . . Valda . . . Valda . . .
My light . . .
She reached the third buoy, twenty metres from the second, on her back.
Unable to kick her depleted legs, she merely wafted her arms at her side,
drifting more than sculling. Repeatedly stopping and looking over her
shoulder to keep its blob of a silhouette visible, she eventually bumped the
plastic ball. Then hugged it.
Valda and . . . light . . .
A strident but thinning chorus of drunken thoughts urged an attempt to
reach the next buoy. Each one would take her closer to the rocks. They
seemed to continue in a line for ever.
Lights . . . Valda . . .
Helene set off for the fifth buoy while still able to move her shoulders.
The ball joints were grinding dry sockets. Curiously warm from the chest
down, she had more of a memory of her legs and feet than any real
sensation in them now. Her body was too heavy.
The next buoy never materialised. She lost it in the darkness.
Too tired to lift her head much, she drifted on her back, arms stroking at
the water. Undulating with the swell, the shivering returned and was far
worse than when she’d first entered the sea. Water filled her ears and iced

her feeble thoughts, her breathing sped-up but she might have been holding
her breath. Gazing at the stars, the sea took her.
She thought the great black tide was returning her out there. And almost
didn’t care.
Valda . . .

34
All was silent upstairs once she’d finished with Headscarf. She’d truly
finished her too.
Shaky but aglow with a strange satisfaction, Kat threw the rolling pin
onto the bed, then returned to the ground floor. The warm, full feeling in her
tummy was like the quenching of an enduring thirst. But what had been so
parched?
Beard was crawling in the hallway, his head down, between his
shoulders. He couldn’t see where he was going and Kat had no fear of him
getting to his feet again. The vibrations of solid wood cracking against his
skull remained in her hands and forearms like trapped static, a sense
memory.
Remaining cautious, she withdrew the paring knife from the pocket of
her joggers and held it to the rear of his neck. Fishing inside the back
pocket of his jeans with three fingers, she retrieved her phone and the front
door key attached to the octopus keyring that Steve had won in an arcade.
The screen of her iPhone was splintered.
In the kitchen, she stepped around shards of glass from the obliterated
light fitting, turned on the bulb inside the extractor hood. She activated the
handset.
Waiting for the software to load, she stepped over Beard and unlocked
the front door, but she couldn’t open her route to freedom wide enough to
pass through, obstructed as it was by the directionless shifting of his body.
If she’d thought her anger depleted and sluiced away by her liberal use
of the rolling pin and pepper spray, she was mistaken: there was ample heat
left and it flared alight, hot and red and quickly, at this new obstacle. She
swung the door from side to side rapidly, slamming the edge against
Beard’s ribs until he fell onto his side and cleared the exit.
On the front path, Kat hauled the cold night air to the bottom of her
lungs. When was the last time she’d breathed so deeply?
She bent double and retched onto the paving.

Gathering her breath and wiping the hair from her face, she straightened.
Her leg muscles had jellied. She’d wrenched tendons too and muscles in her
stomach while battering her foe. But her mind was perplexed more than
shocked at the idea of what she’d just done to two human heads. Why the
heads?
Fifteen years of pain might have just discovered an outlet at the side of
her bed and inside her tiny kitchen. Processing that might take a lifetime.
Join the queue.
Without a tremor of pity, she wondered whether she’d killed Headscarf.
You must be in shock, she told herself.
Back inside the hall, Kat unhooked the one coat remaining on the rack.
Slipped her arms inside the jacket. Then left the house, shutting the door
and its red-faced horrors inside.
She walked uphill, following the lane connecting her home to what
serviced as a village centre, in reality a crossroads of two lanes. There
wasn’t even a shop up there any more. From there she would walk to
Ivycombe, where there would be more light and more people.
Without much enthusiasm, she mused that she should call an ambulance
for the red folk inside her home. But before she moved far, her body
crashed, the trembling in her limbs unstoppable. Her thoughts diffused into
irrelevance. Parts of the last few hot minutes slipped out of sequence in her
memory and into vivid flashes of sound and image that she struggled to
anchor in narrative.
Other thoughts were intent on digression, on scattering along pointless
paths. She thought about selling her house, and her mind filled with a list of
what she would need to do to relocate. Concerns about her deadlines at the
magazine mixed themselves up with plans for her next meal. It had been
cup-a-soup and plain biscuits for four days – when she could stomach them.
Then she was crying hard and saying her mum’s name.
The icons and text on the phone screen were as fractured as the glass.
Thumbing through the call list, she found the number for the detective,
Lewis: he’d called her. Steve was the detective’s case. Her own case was
now connected to Steve’s. Lewis knew what she’d discovered about
Redstone. He should be the first to know what had happened to her. She
tapped the call icon. Her phone sought the connection.
‘Kat,’ Lewis answered quickly, his voice taut, breathless. He was
driving.

‘The police need to be here . . . get here.’
‘What’s wrong?
‘They killed Steve. I saw it.’
‘I’m sorry?’
‘Some of the people who killed him are in my house.’
‘I don’t . . . Where are you now, Kat?’
‘Home . . . near there. They’ll need an ambulance.’
A long pause ensued. All she could hear was his breathing. ‘I’ll get a car
out to you. I’m on my way too. Stay where you are.’
And then she thought of the tall blonde woman, Helene. ‘She was only
looking for her brother. They took her too. They made me give her to them.’
‘Kat, you’re not making sense. I need you to calm down and to stay right
where you are.’
‘You have to find her. Helene. They have her too.’

35
A distant, muffled roar: the crash of water against rock. A sound Helene
had not heard since being carried out to the boat, hooded and bound.
Stiff and racked with shivering, she righted herself in the black sea. Her
feet and hands might have dropped away into the darkness below so she
tipped her head back to keep her face clear of the surface. If she went under
she’d never make it back to the air. There was too little movement
remaining in her depleted, dragging legs.
Her eyes flicked around, looking for where the sea met the rocks to
create the muted impact at its border, before the land began. Only then did
she see the light to her right. Small, bright, not unlike a star in the far
distance. It returned a sense of perspective to a mind lost in the watery
expanse, amidst beacons that never drew closer.
She wafted her arms harder so that her whole head might break free of
the water and see this light better. When enough water had run from her
ears, Helene heard distant laughter. One man, then another. Wheezy, hearty
laughter travelling through the stillness.
She called out. And she called out again. She called, ‘Help’. Her voice
was thin and even quieter than the slop of the small waves in the windless
air. But she kept on calling despite the shudders shaking her jaw. She
fluttered her hands at her side. She was beyond swimming and only wanted
to stay afloat a little longer.
As horrid as the sensation was, at least she was shivering. The muscle
convulsions had started when she’d left the last buoy. Her exhausted limbs
had slowed and her blood had cooled too quickly. Her body’s engine was no
longer able to generate enough heat to combat the permanent, withering,
debilitating cold.
This is the end of me, the end of myself. I just want it to stop.
The laughter stopped and Helene cried, ‘No! Don’t . . . go away!’ She
dipped under.
Fighting the water to get her head back above the surface; if she stopped
moving she would go down fast. A pull from below, a freezing magnetism

between her body and a black depth.
Overcoming the shaking of her jaw, she cried out, ‘Help!’ again, as loud
as she possibly could. The cry doused one of the few remaining embers of
life in her.
The voices returned. They were no longer laughing. She heard the
voices talking hurriedly, as if they’d been frightened by something. Two
more lights joined the first. The first was stationary. The new lights moved
through the air, sideways, along what must be the shore.
‘There!’ a man cried out. A thin band of greyish light flicked over the
black surface so near to Helene’s face. A torch. Under its beam, the
seawater looked like thin oil.
An uneven silhouette moved behind the light, behind the silhouette, the
sudden outline of what might have been a hill. Dull glimmers of stone
suggested themselves. The shore. She’d come in much closer than she
anticipated. So long had she been in the cold water, the textures and idea of
land had erased themselves from her mind.
She’d almost made it. A moment of fascination gripped her; a
wonderment at herself. She’d been dropped into the middle of the sea and
swum so far, so close to the land. She’d nearly done it all by herself.
‘Valda,’ she whispered.
A second tiny orb of light followed the first. More of the vague, greyish
illumination appeared on the water near her head. ‘Christ!’ a voice said.
‘There’s someone in the water.’
‘Can you hear me?’ a second voice called.
Helene nodded. Then remembered she needed to keeping making noise.
‘Cold.’
A new sound entered the worst night of her life, but one that offered an
outcome she’d never considered. And it took Helene several seconds to
understand that the noise she heard closing on her position was that of a
human body wading through water.
‘Baby. Mommy’s coming.’

36
A car engine revved. Headlights appeared and disappeared as the road
twisted beneath the vehicle. It sped along a lane shielded by stone walls and
unkempt hedgerow.
As familiar as Kat was with the road, the speed of the vehicle hurtling in
her direction forced her to retreat from the bend. A speeding car on a
narrow, unlit, B-road could easily swing round a corner and destroy a
pedestrian. It had happened out here. After all she’d been through, the
possibility of being knocked down by a police car was ironic but too
horribly plausible to dismiss. She pushed her body into the foliage.
She’d covered no more than half a mile since leaving the cottage. A few
lights outside the distant houses of Ivycombe were visible ahead. If this car
carried the police, she could easily return home and begin what would be
the first of many explanations. But Headscarf had also managed a phone
call while half-blind. The woman’s phone had been active when Kat caught
up with her at the foot of her bed.
I got the cancers. All over. Don’t. Don’t. They made me do it so I can
have more time.
The screen of Headscarf’s phone had been glowing, so Kat had smashed
the device from the woman’s hand, breaking her thin forearm with a
muffled, sickening crack. So fierce had been her hate for the birdlike
creature who’d watched her shower and use the toilet during her captivity
that she’d proceeded to belabour the woman into total silence, knocking her
about the head, shoulders and neck, before leaving her crumpled down the
side of the bed and leaking into the carpet.
As Kat crouched inside the hedge, what was foremost in her mind was
who Headscarf had called and notified of Kat’s unexpected insurrection.
She feared the swift arrival of brutish reinforcements before the police
lights turned the night blue and red.
The red folk, she assumed, would travel from Redstone. Red country
and thirty minutes away by road if a car was driven as if in a rally. But it
shouldn’t take the police more than fifteen minutes to get to her from

Divilmouth, if they got a move on. Ten minutes had passed since she’d
called Detective Lewis.
The vehicle whipped past Kat. The occupant hadn’t seen her. But when
the car braked hard for the corner she caught a glimpse of the driver. Lewis.
He must have been driving when she’d called him: maybe on duty and
using local roads. Uniformed police and an ambulance would surely follow
the detective once he’d looked inside the cottage.
Kat forced herself out of the hedgerow and headed back to her house.
The police would be forced to detain her on account of what she’d done
to Beard and Headscarf and for using an illegal weapon. But no matter,
she’d explain everything. She wouldn’t be a criminal for long. She’d soon
be labelled a victim who’d survived a terrifying ordeal. And the revelations
that she’d hit the local authorities with would return this small plot of hilly
land to the nation’s headlines. The role and reputation of the Brickburgh
caves would be revised because the horrors of its history were not the
preserve of the distant past.
A new elation at simply being alive was matched by the prospect of
telling the police all she knew. Together, she and the rule of law could put
an end to the despicable scourge that emanated from Redstone Farm. She’d
be instrumental in killing it before anyone else was murdered.
Kat’s eyes moistened as she began to realise she had a future again, and
how important a role she must play in the days ahead.
As she wiped away her tears and gathered her wits to explain the awful
scene that Detective Lewis was about to discover in her home, Kat realised
something else: she was a much stronger person than she’d ever known
herself to be.
She smiled. The expression felt unfamiliar around her mouth, like sticky
food or a tickling stray hair.

37
Two night fishermen found her, fifteen metres out from the shore. Larry and
Ian were local men who’d decided to fish that night because of the clement
weather. With their tackle, stove and the live sand-eels they favoured for
bait, they’d set up at a favourite spot accessible by foot from deeper inland.
Over the years they had walked from their cars to that same spot to haul
flatfish, bass, mackerel and pollack from a pebbly shoreline, from spring
right through the summer.
That night they had arrived at their preferred spot just before dusk’s
indigo light had vanished like a ghost. Two hours later they’d seen the lights
of the boat that had taken Helene out to sea. Three white dots in the
distance. They’d judged the craft to have left a beach half a mile down the
coast from where they found the girl in the water.
Almost imperceptible to Helene as she’d ploughed headfirst and
onwards and seemingly for miles into the black freeze, a northerly current
had caused her to drift to where the men had chosen to fish.
Many other things had conspired to save her too, as if the natural world
had compelled her to live: a calm sea; warmer than usual spring
temperatures at play upon the surface during the day for the previous two
months, following a mild winter; an incoming tide that had turned in her
favour; and the presence of two fishermen who’d wanted to take advantage
of the fair evening weather. It had all added up.
The stamina she had built up by swimming regularly to avert her own
melancholy, frustration and the anxieties that life seemed intent on heaping
upon her shoulders had also made a significant contribution. Had she not
swum so hard for so long she would have drifted past the fishermen. Had
the buoys marking rows of crab pots not appeared, her sodden remains
might have been picked over by the very crabs the pots were designed to
trap. Every variable had coalesced favourably, fortuitously saving her life
and her daughter’s future.
But her love for her child had played the biggest role. If she’d believed
in such things, and she was tempted to, Helene would have concluded that

she was not destined to die that night, because of Valda.
When Helene’s story was shared at the hospital, the fishermen were even
more surprised at how far the pale woman must have swum than they had
been when they heard her voice near the rocks where they’d been standing
to cast their lines.
Ian was forty-six. He’d fished her out. Before walking into the sea, he’d
stripped down to his underwear so that he’d have warm clothes to cover a
cold body when he came out. Without much thought about his own safety
he’d waded up to his shoulders, adjusting his body to the water’s
temperature to prevent cold-water shock. He’d then swum another few
metres, slipped a hand beneath the young woman’s chin and pulled her to
shore, swimming on his side, scissor-kicking for propulsion.
Later, he’d said that just getting her to the rocks had taken most of his
strength, but he added that his endeavour was truly put into perspective by
what she’d endured and achieved on her own in open, wild water for so
long. In her hospital bed, Helene had managed a smile. She’d said, ‘You get
used to it.’
She’d been moments from losing full consciousness and was only half
awake when Larry and Ian pulled her out of the water. Had she lost
consciousness and sunk any further into the hypothermia she’d already
succumbed to, the two men would have needed to attempt CPR on the
rocks, amidst their tackle, and continue the treatment until the arrival of an
ambulance. During the time it would have taken an ambulance to reach that
part of the shore and return Helene to the specialist unit at Divilmouth
Hospital, she’d probably have passed out and sunk away from this life.
Even if she’d still been alive when she’d been admitted to the hospital,
the doctor had told her, she wouldn’t have been far from needing a
cardiopulmonary bypass. This would have required the extraction of blood
that would then have to be warmed before an emergency transfusion.
Extracorporeal membranous oxygenation: that’s what the doctor had called
it.
But Helene had avoided that eventuality, just, and side-stepped weeks of
convalescence, because the fishermen had acted so quickly following the
miracle of hearing her crying out from the offshore darkness.
Ian and Larry had torn off her wet clothes and dried her with a blanket.
Beside their camping stove, they had hastily hauled a spare fleece and the
second fisherman’s combat trousers onto her body.

Larry had forced hot coffee into her mouth after telling her to cough.
She’d not known why, but had obeyed him and coughed. Larry told her
later that he’d needed to make sure that she could still swallow before
giving her coffee. When she’d coughed gently, he’d wasted no time giving
her the hot drink from his flask. The coffee had streaked warmth through
her chest like new blood.
The men had then tugged two hats over her head and pulled two pairs of
socks over frozen feet that had begun to resemble new marble. Ian’s
extreme-weather jacket had covered the fleece when zipped to her shivering
chin. Around the coat had gone their second blanket.
Their swift actions had begun the steady return of warmth to her body;
they’d headed off the coma that had only been moments away.
Supporting her body in the crooks of their elbows like an injured athlete,
they’d taken it in turns to carry her up a hill and along two dirt tracks to
their pickup.
‘She’s a weight.’
‘Don’t say that to a lady.’
‘She’s tall is what I meant.’
And so it had gone, brief exchanges between the men’s hard breathing as
they’d struggled from the exertion of getting her up that hill.
Eventually, with her body between them – one holding her legs, the
other her arms – they’d stumbled to Larry’s Mitsubishi.
Neither man had stopped checking to see if she was awake, or telling her
to stay awake. When they’d reached the vehicle, Larry had needed to sit
down; he was pushing sixty-three and had exhausted himself getting her
that far. Even in darkness, Helene had noticed the sickly pallor of his face
against the dark vehicle.
An ambulance met them before they had time to leave in the pickup.
In that part of the country, people knew what to do when someone was
pulled from the water. They weren’t all bad, Helene had since decided.
Three strangers might have taken her out to sea and thrown her over the
side of a boat. But two other strangers had fished her back out again and
saved her life. Odder things might have happened to a girl during a
weekend away from home, but never to her.

38
Lewis came out of the cottage unsteadily and it appeared to Kat that he
might be sick. His handsome features had no colour beyond an ashen grey.
When he paused to grip the porch post under the carriage light, Kat stepped
out of the darkness.
As if electrocuted, Lewis flinched. He seemed frightened of her. No one
had ever been frightened of her before, but Kat sensed his struggle to
connect the carnage inside the house to the tearful woman he’d met in
Sheila’s office.
‘What the fuck did you do?’ he said.
Kat didn’t answer. As if to prompt a response, Lewis pointed at the open
door. He was wearing a fashionable suit. Hugo Boss. She recognised the cut
from a recent feature she’d written in Devon Life and Style. It looked like
the sample they’d been sent that had been too small for Steve.
‘I’d say the response was proportionate.’
‘What?’
‘They’ve kept me captive for four days. In there. My home. They were
going to kill me.’
Lewis remained speechless. His eyes worked hard at her face.
Comprehension was losing out to shock.
‘Have you called an ambulance?’ Kat asked. The unnatural calm in her
voice surprised her.
The detective nodded.
‘Where are the others?’
‘Who?’
‘The police.’
Lewis finally stood taller, straighter, as if she’d reminded him of his role.
‘On their way.’
‘I need to make a statement. I know what happened to Steve, my
boyfriend.’ She nodded at her house. ‘They killed him. I saw them do it.
They had to wait a while before they could fake my suicide as well.’

Lewis finally came out from under the porch canopy. He looked drained
and sick. One of his eyelids spasmed. He was fairly young and Kat assumed
he’d little experience of serious crimes.
‘I’m afraid you’ve got your work cut out, Detective. For the next few
years, at least. I’d say –’
‘I’d say you’ve said enough.’
And Kat’s arm was up and behind her back. He’d moved so quickly,
turned her round and pressed her thumb so far into the palm of her hand that
the pain immobilised her. ‘Hey!’
Her left arm was snatched from the air and brought about to join the
other.
Kat tried to kick her heel into the detective’s shin. In response, he
depressed her thumb further into the palm of her hand and she screamed
from a lightning bolt of agony, shooting up her arm to dazzle her brain. Her
strength withered as his muscular hands tugged her wrists to the small of
her back. Aftershave engulfed her head as Lewis pushed her down, facefirst into the tarmac.
Her ribs impacted with the unforgiving road surface. She moved her
head to the side at the final moment and issued a thin scream.
A broad knee thumped between her shoulders and knocked the breath
from her lungs. A bracelet looped her wrists. Plastic clicked. The band
tightened, cutting into her flesh. A plastic tie.
As the knee was withdrawn from her back, his hand slipped inside the
collar of her hooded top and clenched. Kat was yanked to her feet, choking
as the fabric noosed her throat, bruising the cartilage.
‘What? You fuck!’ she managed to scream.
A hand squashed her mouth closed. ‘Shut it!’ A command that ended in
a hateful hiss, hot inside her ear. Spun around, Kat was dragged backwards.
Her heels scraped the road to the man’s car.
The detective’s hands remained clamped around her middle but someone
inside the vehicle opened the rear door. Springs in the upholstery sounded
beneath the weight of the passenger with whom she was going to share the
rear.
The opening of the door activated the vehicle’s interior lights and Kat
was tugged about-face. What sat in the rear of Lewis’s car grinned at her: a
thing that seemed to have climbed out of hell’s mouth to take a seat in a
private vehicle.

Luridly white eyes, set in a face the red of blood drained from veins,
expressed a sadistic glee. Two rows of pale teeth split the rust-coloured
head.
Kat pushed back against Lewis. ‘No!’
He picked her body from the ground and stuffed her inside the rear of
the vehicle, headfirst. Right into the naked lap of the thing that reached out
with its red arms to receive the new passenger.

39
‘Would you recognise the place if you saw it again? Do you think you could
identify the people with the dogs who confronted you?’
Helene nodded, though her eyes betrayed her discomfort at the idea of
going back to the farm she knew as Redstone Crossroads.
The female police officer, WPC Swan, smiled. ‘You’d be perfectly safe.
You wouldn’t even need to get out of the car. But if a search is required of
that farm, and arrests have to be made, we need to be certain that we’re
looking in the right place. Redstone covers a lot of ground, mostly
farmland. Your brother made the recordings in a quarry west of the
crossroads?’
Helene nodded again.
The policewoman bit the inside of her cheek. ‘A lot of old quarries
there, that’s the problem. Seven, in fact. They’re dotted for miles around
those crossroads and cover land owned by at least five different farms.’
‘His disc was labelled Redstone Crossroads. He must have made the
recording close to the farm I visited. And what about the men from the
boat?’
‘We have an idea who one of them might be. We’re looking for him
now.’
‘But you don’t have him?’
‘Not yet. He’s not home.’
Helene let that sink in, then sat up in her bed. ‘My daughter. You said
you’d get in touch with the West Midlands police.’
‘She’s fine,’ the policewoman said and leaned forward, one hand
hovering close to Helene’s arm. ‘So is your mum.’
The police in Divilmouth had previously assured Helene that they would
speak to the Midlands force to make certain that her mother and Valda were
safe.
Once her body temperature had been sufficiently restored and as soon as
she’d woken from a deep, exhausted slumber, the first thing she’d done was
call home, at six o’clock that Sunday morning. Her mother had answered.

She’d been asleep and the call had frightened her. No one called that early
unless there was a problem.
Helene’s feat of endurance had left every muscle bruised and aching.
Even walking to the toilet had required the support of a nurse and a wall to
lean on, but she’d felt she had no choice other than explaining to her mother
why she wouldn’t be home that evening. She’d told her that she was in
hospital and being treated for hypothermia, dehydration and exhaustion.
Hearing that, her mother had become breathless. Helene knew that she’d
pawed at her heart too. She always did in moments of crisis.
Helene had reassured her that she was much better. The doctors had said
so. She might even be discharged in a day or two, depending on the need
for her bed. But she wouldn’t be able to drive and would need to convalesce
for weeks at home. Her return would also be delayed while she helped the
police with their inquiries.
Knowing no mother would have been satisfied with so little information,
Helene confessed to Lincoln’s connection to something illegal in South
Devon. She didn’t say much more beyond telling her mum that the horrible
statuette of the dog-headed woman sent to Valda was part of this. Whoever
was behind the gift had sent it as a warning for Helene to stop investigating
her brother’s last week alive. The people he’d interfered with in Devon had
since interfered with her.
Mercifully, her mother’s shock and disbelief had prevented her asking
any further questions. Helene had made her promise to take Valda to her
flat. She’d also extracted an assurance that her mother would not open the
door to anyone except a police officer with ID. Local police would check on
her and Valda that morning. Helene had then ended the call while she’d had
a chance.
Since she’d come round, the idea that Lincoln might have experienced
her own fate and been dumped in the sea to drown had filled her with rage:
a fury recharging her strength more than the seep of vitality that came from
resting in a hospital bed. She knew exactly how he would have suffered
before succumbing to the water.
But there had been no body, so Lincoln being thrown into the sea didn’t
entirely fit. They tended to find them down here, eventually: that’s what the
doctor had said. Most of what she’d remembered of the conversation on the
boat was about something the three men had called ‘the red’. One of them
had said Lincoln had ‘gone to the red’. The pig captain had also used the

phrase as a threat to motivate the man called Phil. But ‘the red’ made no
sense to the police at her bedside.
Helene had also insisted to the officers that the attempt on her life had
been carried out by three men acting on the orders of another. She was sure
one of them had mentioned someone called ‘the witch-wife’. The
constables had tried not to smile.
At nine, the police had confirmed that her car and some of her
possessions had been found on the shoreline of a cove near Plymouth. Her
shoes and rucksack had clearly been placed on the shore to make her
disappearance look like suicide, and she told the officers just that. It was
obvious, but only to her.
At that stage, to her dismay, the police officers suspected she’d made up
the entire story: that she’d entered the water of her own volition. Their eyes
gave them away. The sea’s currents were not in her story’s favour: from that
cove near Plymouth the current could have eventually washed her to where
the fishermen had found her in the water, exhausted, freezing and close to
unconsciousness. People who drowned further north, near Brickburgh, were
even known to wash up as far away as Dorset. The current patrolled the
shoreline.
Her blood-work had been checked for drugs and alcohol. A trace of the
wine that she’d drunk in her room at the guesthouse had shown up. Helene
insisted that had she been intoxicated she’d have made poor choices and
died within minutes of entering the water.
‘The men in the boat can’t know that I survived.’ Helene had blurted
that out when the idea struck her. ‘They can’t know. No one can know that I
survived. Don’t you see, that leaves me and my family in danger?’
‘They can’t know you’re here,’ the WPC with the kind face had said.
‘No one but us and the night staff who attended to you even know who you
are. You’re safe here, Helene.’
She’d succumbed to tears as she attempted to convince the police just
how determined and serious her attackers had been. She’d also continued to
insist the very same people had killed her brother six years before.
But the constables had struggled to accept the Lincoln connection from
the start. In their defence, as she’d shared her assumptions, the connection
she’d made between the sounds that her brother had recorded underground,
so long ago, and the recent attempt on her life had seemed just as
preposterous to her.

When two detectives arrived later, she repeated her story to them several
times. Repeat tellings did not rid her story of its weird and fanciful
character. In her statement she provided information about Carol, the
guesthouse, the red people who’d assaulted her. An absurd story detailing
abduction and attempted murder by people who’d painted themselves red.
The more she insisted the less the police seemed to listen. By early
afternoon she’d wanted to scream and to keep on screaming until they
sedated her.
By midday the WPC brought news that no ‘Carol’ had been traced. The
guesthouse had been empty for some time. The nearest neighbours were
certain that the owners, a retired couple, were in Spain. And ‘this Kat’, the
disturbed journalist who had lured her down for the weekend, had also
vanished. A subsequent visit to Kat’s home by a patrol car revealed the
cottage to be empty and locked. They were still looking for Kat and no one
that Helene had named was available to help the police with their inquiries.
Only when she’d offhandedly mentioned Kat’s boyfriend Steve, did
Helene detect a shift in the detectives’ tepid reaction to her wild tales. All
four officers had exchanged glances across the bed.
A detective had then furtively mentioned that the coastguard and coastal
watch volunteers were currently looking for him in the sea. He’d been
missing for five days. It was believed that he’d fallen from the coast path
during a walk.
Kat’s mental state at the fête quickly acquired a new and startling
significance. Helene’s mind whirred until it ached. The journalist's
instability at the Redhill festival might not have been a sign of Kat’s
heartbreak but an indication of something much worse. If the same group
who’d tried to murder her had taken Steve, then it was even possible that
Kat might have been coerced into making Helene travel to Devon: as a
means for someone to get Lincoln’s recordings? Kat had been desperate to
take the discs and now she was missing too.
‘Kat,’ Helene had insisted. ‘You have to find Kat. Steve’s girlfriend.
She’s involved. This is all connected. Steve. Me. Kat. My brother. His
bloody recordings. I don’t know why, or how, but Kat had information
about my brother. Or claimed she did. That’s the only reason I came down
here. And Kat was so bloody desperate for those discs. Don’t you see?’
Unfortunately the police didn’t.

Frustration burning more fiercely as each rebuttal registered, Helene had
eventually closed her eyes against the impossibility of her situation. ‘How
many of you will be in the car when we look at the farm?’ she’d asked in
resignation.
‘Er, it’ll be us two.’
Helene had looked them over carefully: a small, earnest woman, and a
man who couldn’t have been older than twenty-four and appeared to be
more of a veteran of the rugby pitch than of murder inquiries. Neither
carried a sidearm.
‘Our colleagues,’ the WPC offered, ‘will also be checking the other
farms in that area, backed up by what the neighbouring force can provide in
support. It’s a joint task. Once we’ve identified the owners of the land that
is relevant, we’ll make thorough inquiries. We’ll be sure to get you home to
your daughter too.’
This was said almost apologetically, as if the police were desperate to
get her out of their jurisdiction. ‘Can you have a look at this map now?’
On a tablet, upon which a Google map had been downloaded by the
WPC, Helene traced her route on the coastal path and through each of the
places where Lincoln had made the recordings.
The two constables then conferred with each other near the door until
WPC Swan nodded decisively and said, ‘We’ll start with Willows.’

40
In anticipation of her own slaughter, a palsy came to Kat’s limbs. To be here
again: the scene of Steve’s butchery, the abattoir.
A highlights reel of stored grotesques ran through her mind: the shrieks,
the crack of bone, the flecks of scarlet upon stone, a pale body glistening in
thin light . . .
Stop!
Cap the bastard.
Bestial whines, cutting through the narcotic fog, that yapping of devils.
Claws scrabbling upon rock below the barn, the haste for succour: such
noises left echoes in the mind. Feeding. The feeding. As above so below.
White eyes in red faces. All to be endured again.
Near her cell on the farm, that very metal grate where her lover’s broken
body had lain confused and delirious awaited her now.
Steve’s torments were over and she envied him. Being conscious here
was intolerable. With consciousness came its twin: awareness.
Kat felt ready to take her own life. Better to do it herself before she was
torn apart and fed to . . . dogs.
‘No. No. No.’
She rocked back and forth inside the fusty, unlit room she’d been
dragged into by Lewis and the grinning red fiend. Her hands itched
maddeningly, the circulation almost cut off by the plastic tourniquet about
her wrists.
They’d left her kneeling on the dirty cement floor of an agricultural
outbuilding where rank odours stained each air molecule. Maybe a wet
carpet had once mouldered within the damp confines. A bare floor now
served to signify the reduction in her status and her diminishing prospects,
because the only way out of here was down there: into the red.
In a few hours the sun would rise, but until then the barred window,
encrusted with cobwebs and grime, would reveal nothing but a black square
of deep night.
When would they come?

When she’d been delivered to her final destination earlier that evening
her captors had eschewed a hood. It had no longer mattered that she’d seen
bits of the farm because she was never leaving it. And in a darkness raked
by headlights, a communal expectation had thickened the atmosphere. Cars
had been parked in a lane outside an old house, a few people had milled in
the road, torches scything their haggard silhouettes. A small gathering. For
her. For the reddening.
What she saw of the house had sagged about a weed-corrupted lane of
holed tarmac. Dim yellow light, edging the windows of the ground-floor
rooms, offering a glimpse of ragged hedgerows, long grass, a deck where
motionless figures had gathered to watch the detective’s car pass: the
carriage driving her deeper into where it all began and her final destination.
Before she’d been interned in the grubby cell, her scant mental capacity,
the fraction not consumed by fear, had grown aware of voices outside the
detective’s car: raised voices suggesting that everything might not have
been going to plan for the red folk. She presumed she’d posed a setback, a
thin pyrrhic victory, and the only satisfaction she might derive from despair
turning into a permanent state of mind.
The torment of having been so close to freedom before it was snatched
away was near-impossible to acknowledge. She’d come so close to evading
a death that she’d not imagined possible in the twenty-first century. Any
hope of escaping that was a mirage now.
What she’d done in her cottage had not been enough, because now there
was this. As if marked indelibly during her first visit, her current dilemma
appeared like destiny. She’d dealt with Beard and Headscarf in ways only
conceivable in the psychotic fantasies of her lowest ebbs. Buried aggression
maybe, stored up since secondary school, then embellished by bad
relationships and terrible jobs and finally given vent? She didn’t know.
Though once she’d started down that path with weapons gripped in her
manicured fists not only had her actions become uncomfortably satisfying
but her will had seemed to surrender itself to . . . she wished she knew.
And Lewis, that false saviour, who’d assaulted her and carried out the
second abduction she’d endured within a week, had been displeased with
his hosts on arrival. He’d pulled up beside the row of dilapidated buildings
slumped beyond the sunken house and ranted at someone near the vehicle.
She’d heard some of what the Judas had said, his voice hissing with rage.

‘There was fuck all on those discs. A few noises. What the hell were you
thinking?’
Two motorbikes had passed then, the sounds of their engines hurting her
ears. A car’s headlights had followed the bikes.
It was Tony’s son, Finn, that Lewis had confronted. Kat recognised the
ferret’s voice when he spoke. ‘He got a lot from round here. Film too. All
we know is that we don’t have it all. There must have been stuff in his flat
we couldn’t get out. We didn’t know what the sister had.’
‘Too late now! And you topped that photographer? You bloody mad?
Madder than I gave you credit for. You’re fucking everything up for
yourselves. Do you think you’re invincible?’
‘He saw things.’
‘We had an agreement this wouldn’t happen again. You swore no one
else would go!’
‘Sometimes shit has to happen.’
‘Pay them off! But don’t . . . for God’s sake . . . What are you doing?
What the fuck are you doing?’
‘What’s necessary. And it gets worse so you better get your head
straight, Louie. We’ve also taken our local flyer, the one with the big
mouth, on a journey he won’t be returning from any time soon.’ Willows’s
son had only found the detective’s distress amusing. ‘And your maths is
way off too. Keep up, Louie. There’s the sister who came south for the
ghost of her rubbernecking brother. We picked her up as well. She was
blathering about uploading the recordings. Can you imagine that? We’d no
idea what else she knew, which wasn’t much, as it happened. By then it was
too late. She was in the middle of a red roaming. We put her over the side of
a boat.’
At this news of Helene, Kat’s head had dropped. She’d let the tears fall.
‘This bitch of a hack’s next.’
That news had swiftly returned her to the present.
‘Jesus wept,’ Lewis had said. ‘This stops. Now.’
Finn Willows had spat on the ground. ‘Have you seen what she did to E
and his mum?’
‘The journalist will make it four. Four! Missing in a matter of weeks?
This isn’t bloody Mexico. Two of yours need hospital. Enough of it.’
‘Our own will be taken care of but listen carefully. Everyone’s going to
be keeping their heads down until we know what’s in the wind. We’re out

tomorrow, we’re leaving. And that’s where you come in, Detective. You’re
really going to earn your keep now. Plenty of your esteemed colleagues not
familiar with the enchantments of this red earth and its ways may soon be
poking their beaks in. When this nosy bitch can’t be found –’
‘Enchantments? That what you bloody call this? It’s murder. Multiple
murder.’
‘For your own preservation we’ll need the inside track on everything.
Every angle, every lead, so the red can deal with its foes in its own way.
Like it always has done.’
Kat had heard the detective groan at that; a sound dragging itself from
his belly. ‘Jesus,’ he’d added, the word weighted with the opposite of
salvation.
‘And remember your place, Louie. You’re an associate, a lackey. She’ll
be here soon and I don’t want you running your mouth round her.’
‘You bloody morons,’ Lewis had wailed, uselessly. Kat had sensed he’d
never grasped the full vision of the red.
‘Hindsight’s a wonderful thing, Louie. I bet it was for you, after playing
blackjack online and pissing away fifty grand.’
‘I never agreed . . . not this.’
‘You’re in the middle, Louie, and everything’s at risk. But in the scheme
of things, nixing a few cuckoos is irrelevant.’
‘The red demands.’ An elderly voice had entered the conversation then
and the atmosphere outside the car changed, a hushed tension seeping
through the darkness. ‘And protects itself. They’ve been at our door for
years. We knew this time would come. But what can I tell you? The red
thirsts. All our futures are red.’
‘Tony, for God’s sake.' Lewis had tempered the volume and tone of his
voice, but barely, which had only served to increase Kat’s sense of his
desperation, his helplessness. 'Tonight alone I’ve done a hundred times
more than was ever agreed. I got your people out of that cottage and I
delivered the reporter. I was minutes away from being caught. She could
have called anyone. And you put people in her house. Abduction? You
can’t. You can’t do that. How was that going to end? You’re out of
control . . . This isn’t the fucking Stone Age.’
‘It’s a shame you’ve always hung around the fringes, Louie.’ Tony’s
lordly tone was mocking. ‘If you’d shown a little more commitment, you’d
be more than bent swine with gambling debts. You could’ve seen what we

see, lad. You could have shared something remarkable. It would have
provided you with more backbone than you’re showing now. I’m
disappointed in you, lad. Bitterly.’
Finn had laughed and sounded like a horse neighing.
Lewis’s meagre restraint had finally melted. ‘Save your mystical
garbage for the nutters. And for the simpletons that you’ve got hanging on
to every word of bullshit that drops out of your old lady’s mouth –’
A foot had then scraped the tarmac and the assembled crowd had jeered.
Kat had overheard the sounds of an enraged and screaming woman being
restrained.
‘You ill-mannered bastard!’ That had come from Finn. Huddled on the
backseat, Kat had sensed his anger building through the exchange: he
seemed about as stable as his father. ‘You say that here? You greedy, shitty
pig! You want to be shown what we have here?’
‘Finn! Get him out of my sight.’ Willows’s voice had risen amidst the
standoff, the kicking and scuffling of feet, the confusion in the darkness
outside the car, the convergence and collision of raised male voices. Kat
had recalled an afternoon in a pub in King’s Cross when football fans had
exploded into violence near her table.
If Lewis, a police officer, was working for the family and the operation,
or whatever it was, who else might be in league with the red? Sheila had
introduced her to Lewis. The sudden sickening idea that her editor was
involved had turned Kat’s shock to concussion. Not Sheila, surely. No.
Involved with these dirty, dyed devils? Butchers. Cannibals. She’d never
live to disprove her paranoid grasping but the last few days had been
sufficient preparation for Kat to believe anything.
Eventually, a sullen Lewis had returned to the car and yanked Kat from
the rear seat as if she’d been a dog with fleas that stank and left stains on his
upholstery. His mouth had been bleeding.
Finn Willows had appeared too: a scrawny frame topped by a thin
ponytail and a scratchy beard. His ferrety face a mask of loathing as he’d lit
her path into the cell of the condemned.
Others in the lane had tugged open the front passenger door and
retrieved Beard. He’d lain slumped forward in the seat, ominously silent,
leaking. Headscarf’s remains had been dumped inside the boot by Lewis.
At her cottage, once the detective had secured Kat in the car, he’d
dashed inside to remove as much evidence as possible. He’d come back out

carrying Headscarf like a limp child before depositing her in the boot. There
had been no time for the collaborator to administer first aid: the false
protector had merely hauled the wounded red soldiers from her home so
they wouldn’t be found.
Her current prison cell adjoined the main barn, that place of murder
constructed from vertical planks of wood, stained dark. Earlier, even when
only partially visible from the road, the building’s silhouette had declared
its malign purpose, withering her spirits and chilling her flesh more than the
night air. A black place on land from which all decency had long been
erased.
Before the building’s jagged silhouette she’d gazed as if hypnotised by a
place of worship, where the god was still present. An improperly secured
cap, that’s what the building was. A fragile canopy above a pit so deep she
could imagine an abyss carrying on for ever, through the earth and back
through the ages.
Beneath that wretched barn perhaps even matter as she knew it, and all
that her experience had taught her to understand of the world’s rules,
ceased. A brush with the very idea had paralysed her limbs. They’d needed
to push her inside the cell.
***
A hand struck wood, palm down. The door of her cell opened and the bent
figure of Tony Willows was led inside by a woman Kat put at around fifty
years old. She had once been pretty, even beautiful, but the freckled skin of
her face was grooved and etched by so many creases that her expression
had re-formed into a misery mask. A Pre-Raphaelite princess whose noble
features had slipped and sagged around eyes that still suggested kindness: a
quality Kat forbade herself to hope could exist in such a place as this.
In better light, Tony Willows’s skin now appeared treacle-brown, the
flesh at his throat and sunken chest wattled, liver-spotted. Despite the
timbre of his voice he looked like a man at the end of his life.
Kat found her own voice. ‘This doesn’t have to happen. I’ve no interest
in what you’re doing. I’m not that kind of journalist. Not a reporter.’
Tony raised a palsied hand to silence her, the fingers quivering like a
plucked string. The other lumpy hand gripped a walking stick. His eyes

were half-closed, his demeanour sombre like a judge silencing the accused
who babbles for his grace and mercy.
The woman smiled. ‘It’s not an end, but a beginning.’
Tony’s old eyes opened. They were filmed with tears. He clutched the
woman’s hand and cleared his throat. ‘Nanna's right. People would flock
here if they knew of the miracle. They’d give anything to be a part of what
is here. What abides. You’ve no idea of the bounty, nor the vision we are
blessed with. You can’t understand. You’re a vandal. Vandals destroy what
they don’t understand. It’s what they do.’
‘No.’ Kat shook her head, emphatically. The woman was Nanna then?
Willows's daughter, Finn's twin. She'd been mentioned in the first online
article Kat had read.
Tony only sighed in exasperation as if she was a child displaying naivety
on an important matter. ‘This earth has been remade, lass. So many times.
But through the endless freezes and great flooding thaws, a wonder far
older than our species lingered. We can’t expect you to understand, but you
need to gather yourself. Make peace with your past. And then forget it all
because it really is irrelevant. That should be a comfort. You’re a spark.
They go out, dear. Infinitesimal. Nothing. We’re dealing with something our
tiny minds aren’t made for. I won’t tell you any more because only one of
us can truly see what’s under here, where the red yawns. And may it always
yawn so that some of us outlast the desolation that is due.’
Tony sighed, his chest a dry bag, deflating. He pitied her. ‘But you’re
nourishment for a moment, lass. Nor are we much more. Meat and a few
thoughts, a little heart from time to time. Again, again, again. It always
comes back around. We’re ready, are you?’
To Kat, it was a garbled scripture he must have canted before.
‘Please . . .’ she said, and yet she struggled to plead for her life. Horror
choked her. Pushed its hot fingers down her throat. The profound weight of
inevitability stalled her thoughts. A childlike misery persisted.
Nanna knelt before her and unpacked a fabric bag. She laid two items
upon the floor. A small bottle of brown glass, the contents murky, and an
object wrapped in a white cloth. Whatever was contained inside had stained
the cloth the colour of iodine. ‘You’re strong,’ she said to Kat, smiling
sweetly. ‘Your will has been demonstrated. It has made you even more
delicious. Your strength, your hot spirit, will be wonderful nourishment. It’s
an honour, my love.’

‘This doesn’t have to happen . . . please.’
‘Our red mother watched you. She caught scent of your lover too, the
thief, who crept inside with us.’ Nanna winked, her smile now verging on
the salacious and chilling Kat with the suggestion of a deep instability that
surged behind a seemingly affable veneer. ‘But it’s time to forgo the
struggle. And we all thank you. We’ll never forget you. We love you, Kat.’
‘Love. Yes. We adore you, girl.’ Willows’s faded eyes misted with
sentiment. He wafted a withered forearm as a mad king on a blasted heath
would do to dispense wisdom to his last subject, or fool. ‘You give so that
others can abide. We must pass on, lass. To sanctuary. Conceal ourselves in
this hostile wilderness. Once more, again and again, the red children take
flight. But the black dog and her white pups must be fatted. A dry summer
and a hard winter are coming, my girl, and you’ll be the last for a while.
The last to go down. We’ve made them . . . excitable. They need to rest in
the dark now. For all our sakes let’s hope they do, eh?’
He leaned forward, his eyes peeled with what she read as panic. ‘We
brought them up too far. Too far. You cuckoos are to blame.’
Kat moistened her throat. She didn’t know what could be said in
response to such lunacy, nor whether anything was worth saying. What
words struggled through her shock seemed futile before they left her lips,
even then as a whisper. ‘Please. I swear on my life. This is sacred to you, I
can see that. You’ve done something special. I see. I see that. I get it. I’ve
seen it too. What’s here. I have. I really have. But I have a life. In return for
that, I’ll say nothing . . . do nothing . . . help you even. I can be useful to
you.’
Tony shook his grizzled white head. He was beginning to remind her of
an old Native American chief, or a homeless man leathered by the elements
who chatted druggy nonsense to those passing by his cardboard throne.
Eyes twinkling, the smile benevolent, as if to a child he said, ‘You’ve no
calling. No. You’re a bitch not a witch. But she is one and she decides. Our
witch-wife. She found it. Buried, so far inside . . . years ago. Understand, if
you’re capable, that what was welcomed back has saved us, all of us here.
And she who is greater than us decides who abides and who is swallowed
whole. We follow a message. There’s a receiver. Here. You didn’t know?
No words, no words. Pictures, in the mind. Never been wrong. And you’ve
threatened the old grove. You’re from there . . . that blasted place. Coming

unbidden. All traipsing about. We saw you. We saw you. The red has seen
you off many times. Left your bones in darkness for thousands of years.
‘We watch the door, lass. We merely bargain, and you’re blessed, the
bounty. You’re a full belly on a cold night, girl. Be strong now. That’s all,
lass. Be strong and be grateful for what you offer to what abides.’
Tony's daughter unwrapped the cloth from the object on the floor. ‘Drink
with us now. Close your eyes. And see. It’s rising. Today. For us. The pack
whines.’
‘Blind dogs scamper through the red earth even as we sit here, sharing.
Old Creel! Old Creel!’ Tony shrieked with what appeared to be a private
but powerful ecstasy. ‘And thy thirsty pups!’
Kat flinched as the bowl was laid before her knees. She’d seen similar in
the museum in Exeter and in the slide-show so many years before in
Plymouth, manmade artefacts removed from Brickburgh’s caves. Each time
they’d made her feel sick.
What lay on the filthy ground before her was the top of a human skull.
This one pale and still moist inside. A more recent addition to the
Brickburgh collection. A cup. A cup of special significance like the items
buried alongside the red queens, preserved in graves for thousands of years.
A receptacle: that’s what it was, designed for purposes for which there was
no written or spoken record.
Cap the bastard.
Kat whimpered and backed away from the horrid thing. Shuffling on her
buttocks she reached the nearest wall but could get no further. In the corner
her vision whited out. She spat out the bitter taste that gathered in her
mouth.
Tony grinned. Changed his tone, his demeanour. The wise old man
dropped the beatific act and stepped forward a few thousand years to adopt
a fresher discourse. ‘Good. Even better on an empty stomach. More potent.
Doesn’t get diluted. I’d know too because I’ve taken everything. So let me
put it another way: you’ll not want to venture one step beyond that door
straight, woman. This shit’ll take the edge off. No one can take Old Creel
straight. You’ve gotta be messed-up, lass. So get your load on, girl, because
this promises to be the most intense experience of your life. I’d even be
tempted to consider this communion wine as a form of anaesthetic before
surgery, if you follow, because you’re literally going to come apart next
door.

‘You’ve squeezed us through the ringer, girl, so you must go, as all our
foes are sundered. Who else can we give? And the dogs are out. Can’t say
fairer than that.’
‘The red ways.’ Nanna touched Tony’s arm as if he were being uncouth
and embarrassing a guest in their home. ‘We’ll share what you experience.
Through your terror, Kat, we all share in wonder. Passing to the red is a
great privilege.’
Tony pushed himself upright. ‘Another era ends. Won’t be the last. But
we will remember your cries this day as you nourish sacred ground. So sup,
lass. Sup your last. The red awaits. Your passage between the walls is
booked.’
‘The red abides,’ Tony’s daughter said, smiling. ‘All we red children
abide.’

RELICS

41
Lathered in scarlet and masked and frightful, they made their journey down
the lane: a mother and her dear son. The son pushed the wheelchair. Every
bump and judder of the rubber wheels rolling across each crack, lump and
fissure in the tarmac now so familiar to them, mapped by the vibrations
within their thin, unclothed bodies.
‘This will end where it began,’ the hunched figure in the chair said to
Finn, or to itself.
The odour of the black headpiece that wobbled on his old mother’s head
wafted under her son’s nose: it was the musk of old dogs drying beside
open fires and the distilled stock of sweat made caustic by age. Over and
above the manure from the pony’s paddock, the scent of rain on tarmac and
the cold meatiness of upturned earth, the mask’s fragrance proved resilient.
Hers had been worn for a long time before she found it; the family had
never been sure of its exact age. But the tatty mane of the headpiece had
engulfed her pointy shoulders so many times, as it had covered others
before her.
‘Mother,’ Finn said, sniffing. ‘Quiet now. We’ve made arrangements.
This is only a setback.’
The shaggy skull in the chair twitched. Though muffled, her outburst
was strident. ‘“Did you see . . . It’s . . . moving?” That’s what the girl said to
me!’
Her son nodded as if only half-listening to something he’d heard so
many times before.
Without any acknowledgement from him the woman’s voice continued
to whine through the ragged muzzle of the shaggy helmet. ‘Who could have
known that it would move so much? Or come so close?’
‘I know the story, mother.’
That great black helmet, bison-sized and carrying the face of a devilish
ape upon its grimacing front, so ruffled and patchy and bristling, soon
dropped forward as if the occupant of the wheelchair had fallen asleep. The

toothy mouth grimaced and its eyeless sockets gazed at the road before the
rumbling, rotating wheels.
Between the tatty jaws, inside the cavernous mouth, an impossibly
wrinkled, red face had closed its eyes to remember when she first dropped
out of time. The passenger in the chair had truly gone under, not to dream
but to sink into a reverie of times long gone, appearing as vividly to her as
events occurring the week before.
Forty years gone, she walked the halls of what was here before her. And
had she not done so her life would never have been so long. ‘I’d never have
seen this day,’ she muttered. ‘Our last, as shepherds.’
Her son heard that. ‘Mother. Not true. This is not the end.’
That girl, so long ago, had been right to think the walls below the
ground had moved. A girl in a distant beginning had opened the Creel, but
never lived long enough to understand what it was that had overcome her;
what it was that she let loose with her terror.
‘That was a long time before we knew their nature, son. Finn? Are you
with me, my boy?’
‘Right behind you, mother. Here.’ The man stretched out an arm and
stroked the teeth that protruded from the preserved gums of the headpiece:
bumpy and dusty and the colour of tar. ‘The turning. Round your column. It
must be done as soon as we get there, mother. We’ve the numbers, just, and
the Creel’s right under our feet again.’
‘She was pretty. Excitable. A child.’ She’d been nothing more, the first
girl, the precursor. Sometimes, Jess even remembered her name, Maddy
Gross, who’d played a decorous game too at her man’s ‘soirées’ at the
farm. That she remembered bitterly. So eager had been that pretty lamb for
the dregs of Tony’s entourage.
Tony had caught young Maddy’s eye in an inn out Divilmouth way. Men
always had a use for a girl like Maddy. ‘Tony. Troubadour.’
‘He’s here too, mother. See, ahead of us, with Nanna. We’re all together.
We’ll do this together, like always.’
How he hobbles though. Bent over his stick. An old man who needs a
daughter to guide him now. So old but still the twisted, selfish boy that she’d
taken for herself in Germany a long, long time ago. ‘They all heard about
him here.’ Tony had been the object of such fascination, her man: a fallen
star who’d bought the broken-down farm at the crossroads.

‘But beneath the ground, my son . . .’ Maddy’s beauty had been of no
consequence down there, only her helplessness proved useful. ‘Much more
than our own past. Something much greater we’ve seen.’
‘And much more we will see, mother. Together. Not right here. This is
over. But we’ll survive. Like the red. Always.’
‘“How far are you prepared to go?”’ I asked the girl that. What was her
name?’
The sky had been glowering to dusk that day too, forty years gone, but
the girl called Maddy Gross had still followed Jess below the ground
through the old door in the quarry. She’d worn red boots with Cuban heels
and a special coat she’d found in the house. A suede jacket belonging to
her, Tony’s woman, Jess: the woman Maddy had betrayed in her own home.
Jess had picked out that jacket in Copenhagen when she was with Tull. It
was purple, patterned with rhinestones. But back then, beneath the ground,
Jess had been unsure how to confront the girl. Maddy, her rival, had made
deep inroads, had become dear to Tony, so Jess had only wanted to
intimidate Maddy in a place that was dark. Yes, in the dark. But that was
all: she’d only wanted to frighten her. ‘The matter was taken out of my
hands, my son. The red came. It filled the air.’
‘Aye, mother. And we can’t keep it waiting now. It’s on our doorstep.’
On that day, forty years gone, her old bones were not wheeled down a
rutted lane in a hideous chair like a babe. Her son hadn’t even been
conceived. ‘That sweet girl and I had stepped like nymphs through the
meadow to the quarry. Our hair was so long, so black, son.’ By that
afternoon, forty years gone, no one at the farm had slept for three days.
Coming inside to escape the rain, they’d all crashed on the floors and
couches. Nothing unusual about that but the others were asleep when it
happened, or wrecked when the girl with red boots was lost below the
ground.
Someone from the record label had brought coke that weekend. His true
purpose to inquire about a new album. Terry, a photographer, had come
down from Kensington too, with a shoulder bag stuffed with marijuana.
Sometimes Jess remembered them, the old crowd. ‘Brian was your father’s
manager back then, son. He abandoned his Rolls-Royce in a lane. It was
miles from the farm. It was stuck. He came on foot with a bottle of wine in
each hand. Over one finger he had a carrier bag, from Harrods. It was full
of pills. His car was there for a week until a real farmer towed it here.’

‘Yes, mother.’
‘Under the ground, I held the torch. Poor Maddy didn’t have one.’ And it
was Jess’s light that found the paintings. They were inside the cave. So
horrid were the designs, yet fluent and so elegantly wrought upon the stone.
Jess had never forgotten them. An ancient work. Hellishly beauteous. ‘A
map, a tapestry, a history. I only understood that later.’
‘And how beautiful are your readings of it, mother.’
A work both abstract and figurative. Art that used the contours nature
had fashioned into rock over millennia. How one texture augmented
another had astonished her. How one thing became another when it was
illumined . . . Was that not the nature of this land she’d come to know so
intimately, transformation? ‘It watched us, son. It still makes me
breathless.’
A curving hollow of stone, coloured by hand, had formed a great bestial
eye, to gaze upon the occupants of the chamber for ever. An eye drawn so
artfully in pigments of ochre, powdered bone and charcoal. But for how
long had that eye been open? She hadn’t been able to guess. But after
they’d stumbled from the chute and into the vault the eye had observed Jess
and Maddy, closely.
The first great chamber, but never destined to be the last that Jess would
find.
A much older version of that young woman now laughed gaily in its
wheelchair. ‘That girl . . . Maddy Gross stopped giggling then, I can tell
you!’
‘I bet she did. We’ve watched the faces of a few cuckoos straighten here,
have we not, mother?’
The change in the register of Maddy’s voice had been so abrupt. The
purest darkness was the killer of levity. The sudden freeze had chilled their
spirits rigid. Foes and rivals the women were, but how they had clung to
each other upon entry, she and Maddy, and before paintings so dreadful
that they were instantly sobered from their weariness and intoxication. A
hangover that had lasted for days. There’d been such a party at the farm,
the origins murky, its conclusion indefinite.
‘Your father wasn’t easy to live with, son . . . I’d been below before. To
get away from your father. I’d gone inside. A crevice. But never so deep.’
Much further down that time, much further with the cuckoo, Maddy, who’d

been wearing red boots and Jess’s precious coat: the pretty oaf that her man
had pawed. Maddy. ‘She was not blameless!’
Finn sneered. ‘None of them are, mother.’
Maybe Tony was rich. The girl had surely had that on her mind.
Inquiring but dull, a tiny mind. Though how could anyone have known there
was no money left? The farm had been worthless. ‘I’d only wanted to
frighten her . . .’
Maybe back then, when she and Tony took it on, the dilapidation of the
farm had been charming. For a while: those sombre ruins and the antiquity
of the tools the real owners had abandoned. Tools that spoke of an austere,
methodical use of the land lasting for generations.
The former tenants, a local family, had worked that earth and survived
and watched the quarries open and close, their own fortunes rising and
falling hard, their ranks withering to those two thin men who had sold the
ruins to Tony.
The farmers: an elderly man and his son. The mother of the family had
been in the ground five years. The son had no wife. Everything ended for
that family in those two exhausted, heartbroken men of few words. And they
let a hippy, wearing white cowboy boots, buy their home at a good price.
That’s what happened when you gave up the Creel for the cross.
But how the ghosts of those farmers had continued to make idiotic the
bearded figures who’d been drawn to Tony from London, all of them in their
unsuitable footwear, stumbling about the muddy pastures and churned
yards.
‘This. It was your father’s idea.’ Tony’s dream to live on a farm.
Escaping the system, the suits, managers, accountants, taxmen, the
serpents, usurpers, backstabbers, users, the false prophets, the
manipulative, the hangers-on . . . away from them all, and Jess too. But
she’d never let Tony go. He’d once promised her children, away from the
transience, the fatigue and sleeplessness of a minstrel’s existence upon the
road.
She’d wanted to free Tony from himself most of all, those tendencies for
bedlam that flourished inside his delicate, boyish head. ‘I wanted a home
and children . . . we were going to adopt.’
‘The red provided,’ Finn said. ‘It always has done.’
To be a young family on an old farm so far from the distractions that
were destroying her man: that had been their dream. Together they were

going to be children again, she and Tony, at the dawn of time, before
history, before ‘the man’.
After his stay in the hospital in Surrey, she’d kept Tony secluded and
fostered his desire to sow and reap, to take food from the ground, to grow
smoke, distil cider, to rise with the sun and sleep at sundown.
‘I’d started to believe it was possible. Your father had seen others do it,
buy farms in Essex. He’d envied them. But he couldn’t change. He was
incapable.’ Just like their son, Finn, who’d sowed the new crop and made
them so wealthy. But all Finn’s father had longed for was a lazy kingship.
From afar on tour and in London he’d wished for a smaller fiefdom,
surrounded by admiring subjects. One simpler, easier to govern, his plot in
Devon a Garden of Eden: no tourists and only a few local farms clinging to
the red earth.
But what strange music would he find in a part of the world so left
behind and stuck between the wars? The Sixties had passed by Brickburgh
and Redhill. They promised perfect isolation, but for Tony it was only ever
going to be morbid and depressing. The silence in the valleys, the power of
the sea beyond the cliffs, had soon swallowed them and made their days
boom with loneliness.
How he’d drunk again and picked up his old crutches that he rolled into
cigarette papers: as trapped inside his own labyrinth as he’d been before.
He’d never asked for desolation, never obscurity. He couldn’t coexist with
the highs or function without them and so the darkness had reclaimed him.
His light dimming month by slow month, he’d performed pastiches of who
he’d been. ‘Moving here was the worst thing for your father.’ His
instruments had gathered dust. Ghosts of his enemies had consumed him.
He took to remonstrating with them in loud whispers. He was sick and
yellow. Only the prospect of a party and a girl half his age roused him.
Until that day.
‘The red land was not for repose, my dear Finn. It had to be worked.’
Was not for owning either but it allowed stewards, for a time. ‘We’ve had
our time.’
‘It’s been worked red, mother, our most precious wife.’
And below the red earth that afternoon, when so far from the weak and
watery sun, most fearful was Jess’s recognition that so little had altered
down there. All that was below the ground had remained unchanged for
more years than she could imagine stacked together. How long had those

paintings been on the wall and who were the artists? She asked this, but
who was there to answer her? That worn old man and his quiet son with the
yellow eyes had said nothing when they sold the farm to Tony. Only due
diligence had revealed the existence of the disused quarries and the
overgrown, unstable ground that was once used to extract iron oxide for
paint. The tunnels she’d found had never been mined. They’d formed
naturally and been kept clear. Their old doors had been smothered by ivy or
packed with earth. But they were still open.
And surely those pictures upon the walls were important, valuable? And
without the music from where would their future prosperity come?
Farming? All this had turned in her mind. But in that chamber, without even
knowing it, she was granted her three wishes. ‘The future was decided, my
bright boy. Right here.’ As it was, as it has been, as it will be for others.
Always. ‘We were claimed by the red earth.’
Under this bloody soil she’d seen it. The evidence of the former tenants
was revealed. Ancient occupants who’d left their own mark upon the earth
as her family had done in their time. The etchings suggested ideas she’d
never entertained before.
Others had come later, after the original artists, and settled and felled
the trees in the valleys and left them bare and ploughed the earth into
furrows. In time, she saw it all. Livestock trampled and clomped the hills
shorn and barren. Gouges wounded the land for the extraction of minerals.
Battered and scarred: the place, its people. They'd all inflicted damage and
became damaged upon the soil that clotted like blood. But once it had all
been wild. Like her man and all who came to be with him. And here, beyond
the red crossroads, was a place that had always longed to be wild again.
She’d known at once.
Jess remembered keenly how she’d felt before those paintings. She’d felt
like a mere grain, occupying a place of mystery and wonder for less than a
moment of time.
‘He put me underground, your father, with that idiotic girl. It was his
doing. What was her name?’ His mistress? Maddy. That was her name and
Jess had taken the silly girl deep. ‘I even held her hand as my own daughter
holds his hand now. It was so pale, Finn.’
Final journeys. That had been the last path the girl in red boots had ever
walked. And this was the last one for her own family. ‘My children.’

‘Don’t cry, mother. Don’t upset yourself. Hush now. Hush. We’re here.
Now turn the red, mother. Turn the children about you now, beloved. You
are our column.’
That first summer. There had never been another like it.

42
Out at sea the sky darkened and the wind buffeted from the east, skimming
the distant water and carrying cold, watery pins in its gusts.
The patrol car had stopped at the top of the valley where the land reformed itself into an unpleasant familiarity. Through the windscreen,
Helene recognised the holed tarmac and overgrown borders and bitterly
recalled her relief at finding the crossroads that first time. Breathless and
ragged from the steep ascent up the valley, it was here that she’d come upon
Lincoln’s last clue, scribbled on the side of a compact disc.
The steel gate blocking the lane had been open and concealed by the
overhanging trees. Now it was closed. To reinforce the boundary, two idling
men leaned against the metal rungs of the gate as if in expectation of
unwanted visitors.
The guardians at the gate wore green Wellington boots and waterproofs
in preparation for the rain now pattering on the car’s roof. The hoods of
their raincoats were raised and they wore hats beneath. Fleeces were zipped
up and pulled over lowered chins, obscuring their faces.
Beyond the gate unruly grass and weeds tangled with the hedge and
trees, forming the impression of a narrowing chute burrowing into the farm.
Merely peering down the lane awoke the dogs in Helene’s memory; they
leaped and crushed her into the hedgerow. Kent.
The two police officers alighted from the vehicle and a discussion began
at the gate. Helene cracked the rear window but was unable to overhear
what was said.
She was stowed safely inside a police car but that failed to allay the
bustle of anxiety that shortened her breath. As soon as they’d arrived she’d
wanted to get out of the car and walk away. Here wasn’t safe for her.
Lincoln never recorded anything again after placing his microphones here.
They’d put him into the red.
She’d allowed herself to be talked into returning. The police didn’t
believe her story.

Only one of the men at the gate spoke with the officers, his slouch
transmitting an air of irreverence in the presence of authority. Inappropriate
and no doubt tiresome to the police. The male officer’s arms were folded,
tightly.
The WPC did the talking from their side of the barrier, expressing
herself with hands that never stopped moving: two white flickers in a grey
world, hurriedly working the air. This was a murder investigation or would
be soon.
The second figure’s hood was tight around his head. He looked at the
ground. Hands in pockets.
Helene’s eyes probed that oval head bound in Gortex. She couldn’t make
out the face inside but the spiky proportions of the man’s thin body seemed
familiar. The prick on the boat who’d knelt on her shoulders? She needed
the police officers to make him show his face.
The male police officer returned to the vehicle and climbed in. He
smiled reassuringly. ‘Right pair here,’ he said, then spoke into the radio on
his shoulder.
A crackle of static and a voice electrified the air. Helene marvelled how
anyone using two-way radios understood anything transmitted between
them. But the police officer made a brief report to the radio operator and
mentioned ‘obstruction’.
‘Bit early to be off their heads,’ he also confided. Perhaps he wanted the
operator and Helene to find the situation and these men amusing. ‘But I’m
not smelling drink on their breath. And they’re not for letting us in.’
Another connection stirred her back brain. Drugs. That’s what the police
officer was referring to. It triggered thoughts of Lincoln. Substances had
handicapped his development through his teens, his early twenties too. And
where there were drugs criminal elements and tendencies abounded.
The officer finished his call with ‘We’re going to take a look around
inside.’
He turned to Helene as the radio operator’s voice buzzed meaninglessly.
‘We’re going to make this pair of likely lads understand that we’re pursuing
some serious allegations.’ The young officer was confident and that worried
her.
‘I don’t like it,’ she said. ‘The skinny one, I don’t know . . . he looks
familiar. I can’t see his face. Make him show it. Then maybe we should go?
You can come back without me. I’m feeling very uncomfortable.’

‘Sure. In a minute. But we need to do a recce first and we need to speak
to the landowner, this old rock star, about what he’s got on his land. See if
this quarry is near and if he saw your brother. We’ve got your description of
the couple with the dog as well but we can’t take the car any further.
They’re claiming they haven’t got the key for the padlock.’ The officer
rolled his eyes. ‘So we’re going to hop over, find old Tony Willows and
where this quarry is and come right back. They’re hiding something. See it
a mile off. We’ll be quick.’ Before she could raise any further objections,
the officer alighted from the car with an athlete’s grace.
When she’d traced her route on the pad for the police officers, one of the
plainclothes detectives had said that an old musician owned the farm by the
crossroads. ‘An old hippy. Harmless but nutty.’ Helene and the uniformed
officers had never heard of him. Tony Willows was his name. Helene
thought that was what the detective had said. Willows, like a tree.
Now they were going to leave her inside the car and enter the farm: a
notion that made her feel terribly exposed, just like she had been in the
water the night before.
Helene shivered inside the coat loaned to her at the hospital. The sea’s
chill was far from thawing from her marrow but she wound the window all
the way down to try and hear the discussion.
In the distance a motorbike spluttered, its echo adrift in the valley. As it
died away, a faint sound of what might have been a whistle was issued.
Several long notes followed.
No, it wasn’t a whistle but piping. Yes, pipes. She could hear pipes, soon
accompanied by a murmur of raised voices as if a choir was warming up or
a small crowd jeering. The sounds reminded her a little of Lincoln’s
recordings.
At the gate, between the officers’ heads, she gained better sight of the
other men’s faces. They’d raised their chins, alert to the pipes. The
overweight man had a boozer’s ruddy complexion. Helene had also seen
him before, though where she couldn’t yet grasp. She heard him say, ‘As I
told you, no key, like. And you still ain’t give us no reason why you want to
come in.’
The WPC leaned in closer to him, her voice too low to hear. But
whatever she’d said brought a reaction from the second, thinner man in the
hood. He moved his head towards the car as the WPC’s voice rose. ‘I’m not
going to ask you again to move away from the gate.’

As the portly, red-faced figure grinned at this rebuke, Helene
remembered where she’d seen him before: he’d been bellowing into a
microphone at the Redhill village fête.
She also saw the face of the second man more clearly as he peered at the
police car. Trying to see who was inside. Cheeks hollowed out as if sucked
in, a broken nose, acne scars: Richey, the rat from the boat. And no matter
how indistinct, the very sight of him conjured the ghosts of his bony hands
around her ankle as he’d raised her leg to tip her into the sea. She’d
scratched his face: he’d be marked.
Helene sat up straight. The wind about the car seemed to pause. As she
cleared her throat to call out to the police officers, a distant female scream
tore the taut atmosphere apart: a far-off but urgent cry.
The police officers cocked their heads at the distant trees. ‘Right!’ the
WPC shouted, then dipped her head to the radio at her shoulder.
From somewhere near the origins of the scream a group of dogs barked
a noisy chorus and Helene wished that she was lying in the hospital bed
again.
The two men at the gate broke away and began running in an ungainly
fashion down the private road. Their rubber boots flapped noisily. Richey
made yards on his portly, intoxicated comrade.
Helene scrabbled at the car door, her muscles and arms unthawed and
slow.
The male police constable climbed the rungs of the gate first. The metal
barrier wobbled, shaking in protest, but once on the other side, he held it
steady as his partner ascended the rungs. They were going in.
Helene’s heartbeat thumped up her windpipe and beat inside her ears.
She clambered from the car and shouted, ‘Him! From the boat! Skinny
bastard wearing the hood!’
The police woman looked at Helene and nodded. ‘Stay in the car!’ she
called, before angling her mouth to her radio. Her colleague was already
gaining on the portly oaf.

43
The pyre crackled and snapped. It was only half the size of what had been
ignited for Steve. Regardless, like her lover Kat knew she would die here:
inside a ruined, reeking barn, tied to a grate encrusted with his blood. She
would depart this life from a miserable patch of dirt enshrouded by the
stench of animals.
Shivering upon the dirty cement of her cell for hours after refusing the
Willows’ drug, Kat had listened to the preparations for this event in the
barn. They finally came for her around noon.
All morning the dogs had raced in the lane outside her cell. Motorbikes
had growled past before roaring away to the valleys where they’d grunted
like excitable animals set loose. A commotion had agitated Redstone Farm.
She’d sensed that something was being collected and removed in great
haste. Hydraulics had wheezed as if freight transport had squeezed itself
down the rat-run. There had been much clanking of metal and screeching of
roller doors. What sounded like a van had repeatedly bumped up and down
the tarmac on incessant journeys.
When Willows had arrived with the skull-cup to offer his anaesthetic,
he’d cryptically alluded to ‘exile’: her death the last ‘nourishment’ of the
red earth. At least for a while. From this she could only assume that her
demise would serve as a last hurrah before the red rats deserted their
bunker.
She assumed the red folk were engaged in a tactical retreat. Perhaps
Willows and his band of red murderers had been found out. They’d been on
a spree for sure, confirmed by the argument Lewis had chaired that she’d
overheard. Maybe they’d killed beyond their ability to conceal their scarlet
tracks through these hills and inside their neighbours’ homes. The detective
had been furious at their profligacy with the blood of strangers. And when
Tony and his daughter had performed for her, and recited their mystical,
apocalyptic script, she’d known enough anxiety in her own life to smell it
on others.

Inside the barn, the hooting and the shrieking of the man-apes was less
intense than it had been for Steve. The piping came less shrilly from the two
red musicians holding lengths of antique bone. Each was elderly: a bony
man and a woman not far shy of eighty. They formed a shabby ensemble.
Their notes and overtones were tunelessly piped into a space that seemed
too airy and bright for what was intended.
Partnered by the wet, grey weather, a desultory, subdued aspect had
dogged these proceedings from the start. Her own spirits had waned to the
same hues of the watery, washed-out light that made the world outside the
barn so drab. She could see some of the sky through the crack left in the
barn doors: it was as murky as a dismal seascape that vanished into mist.
Rain had speckled the roofs all day.
Not nearly as many of the ‘red children’ had gathered for her slaughter.
She counted only eight including the pipers. Naked one and all, daubed in
scarlet dye, but tucked against the walls like shy pensioners at a dance in a
community hall. Their voices were smothered by the roar of the vehicles
outside in the lane and barely reached the blackened rafters.
Perhaps the wrong atmosphere produced such muted effects. Maybe
daylight was interfering with the environment requisite for murder. Kat
imagined the red was best accessed at night: the traditional time of
nightmares, criminal deeds, Sabbats and the sundry unwholesome acts of
the depraved. That made sense but brought no comfort, because here she
was again where the imminent actions of these people promised to match
the very worst incidents in her country’s criminal history.
Braziers had been lit and they issued a familiar, sickening pungency.
Keeping her breathing shallow, Kat plugged her nose with her grimy
hooded top and spared a thought, which seemed gigantic inside her skull,
for how many others had also lain upon this altar before passing to the red.
‘Oh, dear God,’ she occasionally muttered and had little else to offer the
grubby air of the barn. This sign of her trauma went unacknowledged.
She’d thought for a while that she should try and knock herself out. She
also feared that her refusal to sup the brown fluid had been premature. But
drinking from her boyfriend’s wet skull had stalled any thought of
swallowing the filthy medicine. She’d kicked the horrid container across the
floor of the cell and watched it skitter, spilling its contents across the legs of
Tony’s daughter Nanna. But not before father and daughter had each taken a

good draught. And if they’d required medicating before exposure to Creel
then she’d need a double dose.
Victims were drugged here, dismembered, partially consumed, the bulk
of their parts cast into darkness. That’s why they’d wanted her stoned, to
assist her end. This was no mediaeval practice but an abhorrence culled
from much earlier times, before civilisation tempered the bestial urges of
her species. ‘Dear, dear God. Dear God,’ she repeated, though she didn’t
know why: the last time she’d been in church was for a wedding.
They would remember her demise, cherish it: that’s what Willows had
said, and at the memory of those words Kat stared down and through the
grate, seeing only empty darkness. An absence. A steady stream of air that
reeked of wet stone and animal rot passed over her face.
The Black Dog. The White Pups. Her recall of the names made her jaw
wobble like a child’s. But the drugs and ceremony, the wretched but
carefully wrought atmosphere, might be nothing more than a ruse for when
wild dogs flowed over each other down there in the black pit. Fighting
dogs. Animals conditioned to consume what was thrown down still warm
and wet.
Perversely, the prospect of real animals was less awful than what she’d
imagined rising from the earth during her previous visit. And that was all
she could hope for now: that she’d been wrong about something else
inhabiting the black space beneath the floor of the barn.
Oh, Steve.
The sounds the creatures had made that last time, and the movements of
the earth, and the transformation of the old wooden walls into painted stone
before her eyes: for these strange and hideous things she had no answers.
The sense that she’d been returned to another time, where she’d seen beasts
and rough-faced people crudely put to the flint inside a cave: how could she
explain that?
Her shaking worsened.
Kat sipped the toxic air. She’d pretend she’d succumbed to the fumes
when they came to remove her bonds . . . to move you into position, facedown . . .
She’d fight like before when trapped like an animal in her own home.
That would be her only chance. There would be a moment and then . . .
Suppressing the image of a hand-axe, the blue flint glistening in red
light, Kat squeezed her eyes shut.

All here might change again, soon, transform: the building, the very
earth she lay upon destined to alter and welcome what pawed hither, across
the moist ground. This notion she could not suppress. It persisted. Now,
right here, would soon combine with another time. One place would
become the other.
‘God!’ As if her cry acted like the bleat of a tethered goat, her distress
finally received its acknowledgement from deep below. A thunderous
rumble, as if great stones had just ground together, created a tremor across
the very surface of the world. A subterranean groan followed by a bustling,
or a burrowing through the red earth.

44
The woman in the distance issued another scream. It ripped apart the drizzly
air. A chilling resonance lingering about the police car Helene stood beside.
Somewhere deeper inside the farm, farther down that potholed lane, a
mind had snapped, its terror insufferable: a distress signal confirming that
the police presence was no longer a matter of merely making inquiries.
Wailing came next, as if from a sparse crowd of agitated lunatics.
Coordinated cries rose in unison to form a shrieking chorus, one that
repeated in waves. A woodwind instrument piped in and out when the
wailers paused for breath. No discernible tune, just random, blurted, reedy
notes. Male voices barked. Their contributions too distant for words to be
distinguishable but the tone implied anger, or even exultation, structured
into a crude rhythm.
Smoke billowed beyond where the lane turned: a dirty trail of charcoal
vapour disappearing into the low grey cloud. But the deep rumble that
thrummed the soles of Helene’s feet was the most frightening sign of how
the world around her appeared to be altering.
Perhaps it was only her vision and not the light dimming, but night
appeared to be falling prematurely. She peered up at vestiges of watery
sunlight leaking through the thin cloud: a veil of ashy vapour oppressed and
gradually swallowed by an advancing shelf of black sky, ushered from the
sea by a strong, new wind. Rain pattered on her coat and her face. She
shivered.
An earthquake, or its aftershocks, or an earth tremor, registered again in
her ankles and knees. She imagined that great gears of rock were churning
within the earth. The thud of her pulse drew the blood from her legs. She
rested her weight against the patrol car and cowered behind the rear door.
A motorbike’s roar broke from the distant chaos of human cries: a bike
approaching the gate. The engine’s grunt set her teeth on edge, her instincts
anticipated violence. Helene’s need to get inside the car and lock the doors
competed with an urge to run.

Behind her, two thin lanes cut the fields and led away from the farm:
tarmac crowded by hedgerows that offered no cover. And how far would
she get on a B-road with a motorbike in pursuit?
The path that had first brought her here from the Brickburgh Caves was
closer. That track ran into the valley below, the wood beneath the farm
topping slopes of pasture. She could hide in the trees until the police were
reinforced.
Helene fled along what her guidebook had called an ‘ancient green
track’ connecting the caves to the crossroads.
Alongside the righthand side of the track, trees and vines marked the
wood, underpinning the sly grin of the private road like a tangled beard. At
the first possibility of ingress, where the blackberry vines and nettles rose
no further than her knees, she stepped off the track. Arms up to protect her
face from the whipping branches, she yanked her knees high and clumsily
stepped through the spiky undergrowth, cutting inwards, parallel to the lane.
Moisture soaked her calves, nettles stung her ankles.
The roar of the motorbike drew level with her off-road position. At the
gate the bike’s engine coughed to idling.
Helene couldn’t see through the wet tangle of tree branches but heard
the rider dismount.
Stepping a few feet further inside the wood she came upon a boundary
fence: three strands of wire strung in line with the gate. And almost sobbed
with frustration. If the motorcyclist followed the track and spotted her at the
edge of the wood he’d reach her before she could clamber over the wire.
Nor was this terrain she could move across in haste. Unmanaged, the thorny
vines and deadwood created a perpetual tangle as far as she could see.
She’d tear her legs to ribbons.
Where were the police?
Up on the lane, the gate jingled and a chain slapped the tarmac. Hinges
groaned as the metal barrier swung wide. The motorcycle was remounted,
the engine revved. The vehicle roared away.
Helene exhaled, sagging with relief, then attempted to climb the fence in
case anyone else came down the lane.
It was not easy to get over; the wires dug into the palms of her hands.
Supporting her weight, the length of wire shook, wobbled and seemed
determined to pitch her over into the waiting nettles. By clinging to the

nearest wooden post she eventually managed to get over, falling more than
climbing.
As she squatted in the nettles and brambles on the other side,
perspiration prickled icily across her scalp.
The motorcyclist had been in a hurry: his bike now subsided from full
throttle to a whine in the damp distance. He must be making a run for it.
With the arrival of the police, that made sense.
Helene looked deeper inside the wood ahead of her, to where the
bracken eventually thinned about a haphazard arrangement of trees.
She strode between the thick, thorny stems to better conceal herself.
She’d crouch and hide here. More police would be arriving in support.
She’d seen the WPC use her radio before giving chase to Richey and the
purple-faced clown.
But that scream: ripped from a throat while others, inexplicably, were
playing musical instruments and singing? What in hell was happening here?
Muffled by the trees and thick undergrowth, the piping and the wailing
continued in the distance and Helene couldn’t quell a suspicion that she’d
arrived as an event ensued at the dreadful farm. Even the wood maintained
a peculiar, unnerving stillness as if it had paused in its wild business to
observe her ungainly entrance.
From the very start the area encompassing Brickburgh and Redstone had
struck her as peculiar: enchanting, weird, sinister, hostile. In this
environment she couldn’t have expected to be more than a city girl out of
her depth. But her deepest instincts conveyed to her that this place was just
not right in a more fundamental way. Its strangeness was about more than
psychotics painted red and murderers on a boat.
She waited, biting her lip, her eyes those of a hunted animal. About her
the canopy dripped water. Mulchy and damp and dank: an atmosphere
failing to offer reassurance to those desiring concealment. It was hard to
imagine this ground ever being dry. From the fields of the valley drifted the
aroma of animal dung and, with the new ceiling of storm cloud, dusk had
surely arrived at midday. Beneath the treetops the light thinned further. She
needed a torch and fought a childish panic that the land was cursed in ways
she’d never understand.
Legs buried to the knee in nettles and dead wood, she passed deeper,
from one lichen-slippery tree to another, to better hide herself, then ducked
at the approaching roar of a second motorbike on the private road.

This bike didn’t stop and only slowed to pass through the open gate
before turning west like its predecessor. She saw nothing of the bike or rider
save flashes of yellow between the boughs and verdure. But they weren’t
looking for her.
More vehicles followed the bikes. One, two, three cars passed through
the gate, including a four-wheel-drive. A white Luton van shuddered out
soon after. The police had routed something. There’d been too many people
down there for the law to control or subdue: a significant number of people
must now be fleeing arrest.
When the noise of the straining engines dimmed, other sounds filled the
empty grey atmosphere above the farm. A muffled male voice ranted in a
sequence of gruff sounds: a sentence of sorts that was rhythmic like a chant.
A woman wailed as if engaged in a Middle Eastern lament. Dogs
maintained a perpetual barrage of angry barking.
Two police officers were down there so why weren’t they stopping this?
They’d be outnumbered.
Helene imagined the neat, trim, young constables being overwhelmed.
Though by what?
Still weak from her ordeal in the sea and only declared fit enough to sit
in a heated car while continually hydrating her body, she could do little to
assist them. Her role had been to identify a place while fingering anyone
she’d suspected of involvement in her abduction and attempted murder.
She’d done that. Even if her core temperature had stabilised that morning
there was no fight in her.
She listened to the rain on the leaves and the harsh sound of her own
breathing against the hood of the coat. What to do?
A compulsion to know why she’d been thrown into the sea and why her
little brother had been murdered competed with caution.
She needn’t risk exposure by getting too close to the shouting and the
smoke. If she watched what was happening while concealed by the wood
she might at least act as a witness. The police officers had tried to help her.
They’d also run to help the woman who’d screamed: they’d risked their
own safety without a second thought. She had to do something. Helene
moved on through the trees.
Another thirty metres through the tangle and she saw the top of the
grimy, sprawling farmhouse, near where she’d been stopped by the scruffy
poshos and their dogs.

Creeping closer to the lane she established there was no one out in front
of the building and no dogs. The commotion was occurring much deeper
along the private road, somewhere out of sight, perhaps at the epicentre of
whatever continued to rumble beneath her feet.
Soon she found herself struggling to see much further than a few metres
in any direction, and feared the sun risked being totally obscured. She
looked up, remembering the eclipse of 1999 that she’d seen on holiday: the
vast sweep of cold air that had hushed the earth around her in Cornwall.
Momentarily epochal, that quickening of night. The eclipse in Falmouth
had pierced her with a pang of cosmic terror and she’d been left breathless.
Lincoln had been entranced by the spectacle: a minute of darkness during
the day.
But unlike her experience in Falmouth, within Redstone’s sudden and
unnatural darkness Helene now heard the sounds of Lincoln’s final
recording.
Inhuman shrieks. And much louder this time: a distant yapping that was
almost a voice before it laughed horribly. Never quite human yet garbling a
message that made her visualise wild apes. The volume of the horrid chatter
obliterated the human cries and the pipes as if all before the exotic shrieks
had been muted in shock.
There were several of these animals down there. And such cries could
only be uttered by beasts of considerable size: powerful forms with a
tremendous lung capacity. Perhaps a breed of giant cat that they kept on the
farm?
Or maybe she was hearing an ape after all, a great ape, and its cries were
suffering from acoustic distortion and amplification in the valley below.
Helene hoped so.
The rapid laughter beyond the wood degenerated into a sustained
growling, wrung deep from a throat wet with mucus.
Helene’s shaky confidence withered. Instinct or imagination again
connected the cries to giant savage cats: she effortlessly pictured them
rolling across the ground engaged in desperate combat. The alteration from
the unpleasant yapping and demoniac giggling to the roar had been so
sudden.
Amidst the signs of bestial outrage human screams rent the air.
Horses too? Surely those were horses that now shrieked amid the rout of
people? The sudden equine cries split the air not far ahead of her, piercing

the gaps between the trees.
A hound yelped itself into an unnerving silence. Then another squealed
horribly and fell quiet.
Helene crouched deeper within the sopping undergrowth, the ferns and
dead wood.
A malefic snarling spiked her ears. An idea of muscular jaws worrying
and shaking prey set her teeth on edge and she finally clapped her hands to
her ears. Had she been on a safari in Africa or beside a zoo, she’d have been
better able to accept the presence of such ferocity. Even then, what kind of
animal could it be and what kind of zoo was equipped to contain such
savagery? But she was certain that something bestially dangerous was now
running amok on the farm.
The earth beneath her feet grumbled in the grip of an aftershock.
Distant but rapid bangs against wood followed the monstrous shrieks of
rage. The irregular, sickening thuds made her think of bodies flung against
walls. A few human screams managed a final, desperate crescendo, one
voice so full of terror that Helene stuffed her index fingers inside her ears.
She’d never heard anything as awful as that cry.
In wet air astir with such violence the only noise that offered a shred of
reassurance was the distant police siren emerging from the north. She
couldn’t judge its distance, but as if cowed by the distant wail of the siren,
the desperate struggle on the farm muted.
The maelstrom of screams could not have lasted for more than seconds,
though to her those hateful moments had seemed to elongate time, to trap
her in a turmoil that, had it continued for longer, would have sent her mad.
And whatever had just occurred seemed far worse for this abrupt, unnatural
subduing.
Obscured by the trees ahead, a man’s voice soon called out in torment to
break the temporary silence.
A second male voice chattered continuously, the words undecipherable
yet incongruously calm. Perhaps he was asking questions that no one would
answer. The animal cries had ceased. Thank God.
Beneath the ground the rumbling had also concluded, though her senses
had been so paralysed by the awful animal sounds that she’d not noticed
when the tremors had stopped.
A woman now wept as if in desolate answer to the groaning man
imprisoned within a tremendous suffering. The second male voice still

talked incessantly but drifted away.
No dogs, no horses and no vehicles could be heard at all. This new
absence of all save a few sounds of human distress, and the rain against the
leaves of the bent and tangled trees, created an eerie vacuum. It settled
amidst the wet wood like the uncanny silence over a well-used battlefield.
Helene’s fatigue equalled what she’d felt lying in the hospital bed. But at
least the air beyond the wood was perceptibly lightening and filtering back
to the watery grey of only moments before. The fall of rain was now more
refreshing than confining.
She crept on through the undergrowth as noiselessly as possible, certain
that she was approaching an aftermath.
Her hunch was confirmed when she reached the paddock.

45
Four weary figures hobbled along the tunnel, their descent enclosed by wet
walls. They scurried further, deeper, away to where lights were embedded
in the rocks in a widened passage. From darkness they came back to the
light. From siege to freedom.
Bare feet scuffled the rock. The old man’s tortured wheezing competed
with the sibilant whispers passing between the mother and her son; he now
carried his mother within his sinewy arms, her wheelchair left far behind.
‘My boy. We shouldn’t go on. Take me home, Finn. Take me back
home.’
Finn sniffed and swore under his breath. He’d been crying over the loss
of his dogs and for the abandonment of the precious crop he’d raised from
the rocks like John Barleycorn. ‘Police. They’re at our place. They must
have seen it. I doubt it was pretty. The old Creel was wide open. We’re for
sanctuary, mother. There’s nowhere else for us now.’
‘Sanctuary? I don’t trust him. Adrian’s no true neighbour.’
‘He owes us. The arrangements stand. They were made for this day.’
‘Am I heavy, son?’
‘We’ll be out of here soon. We’ve a car, waiting. We’re safe. I promise.’
‘“They moved.” You know, the girl said that to me, son, when I was this
far down the first time. Maddy. That was her name. Maddy Gross. Have I
ever told you that? Finn?’
That was the last time Jess had been so frail and frightened down here,
but not as frightened as Maddy. Her torch’s light had revealed the face of
the girl in the red boots whom she’d lured into the quarry. And by torchlight
Jess had seen the child the girl had once been and the child she’d remained.
She’d been so young.
The girl, Maddy, had seen the movement in that chamber too, on the
walls.
It was all so long ago now but Jess remembered being tired and
hungover. Her mind had not been as it should have been. She’d been taking
things, smoking them, for a long time. They all had at the farm. She’d been

open to the suggestions of the darkness. But, without a doubt, she’d seen
something similar to the movement of bodies beneath a blanket at the
corner of her eye, where the torch’s light had thinned across the painted
walls of the cave. A disturbance, a shudder.
‘Can we go back?’ the girl had asked, eyeing the torch.
Yet, despite the unnatural motion inside the chamber and how it had
frightened young Maddy, Jess had continued to hate that pretty face beside
her. How fresh the wound of betrayal had been. A cut reopened by a
memory of the girl’s flushed face when she’d stumbled back to the fire
they’d had in one of the fields, after Tony had had his way with her, up at
the house.
So like some foolish, jealous peasant girl in one of Tony’s old songs,
Jess’s hatred had flared, the old green burn. She’d already entered the red.
She’d just not known it at the time. The red made her see things differently.
The animals on the wall had moved again. The girl hadn’t lied. Jess’s
own eyes hadn’t deceived her either. A ripple creased the striped flanks of
the painted herd. Their heads rose and fell. The movement was natural.
Their white eyes rolled; they were alive.
Yet when Jess looked again at where she’d seen the movement, the
figures all became stationary, as if she’d merely seen apparitions of
charcoal sliding over the stone.
The girl had screamed.
The air had smelled of iced turf.
Then they were cold, became colder, were shivering.
From where had those piped notes arisen? From deep in the tunnels
beyond the chamber, or from behind the walls? Had their presence coaxed
out the fine notes? And how, down there, had so many come to move about
them in the darkness? Maybe the girl’s screams had woken the earth and
the restless ground was no longer asleep. What was not seen was sensed,
parting the black air, their faces buffeted by curious wakes and slipstreams,
a slow breath moving their hair. They might have been standing at the edge
of an underground platform anticipating the roar and rush of an
approaching train.
Where had the walls gone, upon which the lurching herd had been
etched? The torch’s light had failed to find them. The walls had disappeared
or been removed like stage sets. Same above their heads: the space had
become big enough to know no boundary.

That was the first time Jess had seen in the dark and the first time she’d
seen what had panicked the herd into flight.
In the cold darkness, strong, dirty teeth had chattered close to her face.
The laughter of dogs had broken above her head.
The herd of animals that could not have been there had jostled and then
broken into a rout.
The feeble glow of her torch had flicked across an upright devil. The
first one. The trembling beam unveiling it from out of the dark and for no
more than a moment. But there had been an indistinct face. A white muzzle.
Most horrible. Wet. Snouted. And dear God, the eyes. Pink like a rat’s. A
pale breast matted red. Big and white it was, up on two feet and drenched
down the front from what it had been eating. It had made Maddy scream.
She’d seen it too.
The torchlight had shrunk from the form as if of its own volition and the
beam had crossed the great eye to reveal a second stained muzzle, atop
another long, white, furred thing with a distended belly that also moved
about on two legs. And yet its body was fashioned for walking on four.
They’d been on the walls of that cave, those albino terrors, but weren’t any
longer. It was as if they’d climbed down.
Insensible, a hysterical child, Maddy had stumbled, fallen. And Tony’s
young mistress had cast about for a way out on her hands and knees. Poor
Maddy never stood up again.
And so briefly, yet so clearly, through that pall of darkness had slowly
grown a great white sky, spread so wide above the frozen ground they had
smelled at their feet. A tundra. So little grew: the earth had iced to stone
and had rumbled from the hooves of a stampede.
They were no longer inside the cave? Or was that new place purely
inside Jess’s mind? All that was painted upon the rocks was animate, alive.
And that raw eye, painted upon the stone wall, was far too moist.
The first time.
The babble. The terrible babble that had approached from a crevice that
Jess had seen on the far side of the cavern before everything changed. Out
of that wet, black slit had burst the sniggering, the baying, the awful
whining. It had echoed through her mind ever after.
The girl, Maddy, had taken to whimpering.
The origin of the new shrieks was not visible, but a doggish snout was
easily imagined, like those of the two white bitches with fearsome eyes that

had tottered past on their hind legs. Yet, in comparison to the sounds that
had barked from the crevice, the white things must have been the young.
Because another, much larger presence had arrived in the cave.
An apprehension of its presence alone had further panicked those
animals upon the walls. And all around Jess had raged the bellows and the
frantic kicking of hooves as the herd ran blind.
What on the earth could have produced that stench? Her mind had been
consumed by the most powerful presence, many carcasses strewn in its
wake.
Heavy unseen forms were slammed against the frozen ground as the
cave’s purpose opened, though not wholly. The paintings were mere
impressions of where the herds had once been stampeded: into a pit where
they were splintered like timber. A vision from the dark.
Maddy in the red boots finally fell silent. That had been worse than her
hysteria.
Something hunted there, in that cave, always. The paintings on the wall
were only understood by the terrified when inside such a darkness. Up and
down, north and south, what was far and what was near, made no sense
when your mind became a spark dropping into cold space. Jess learned this
the hard way. And only at the brink of a mind being extinguished, when so
deep, was such vision granted without light.
Jess had run. She left the girl behind: the mewling girl on her hands and
knees, wearing red boots and a jacket that hadn’t belonged to her.
Jess had fled among the red people. Those who’d appeared around her
and who scrambled away after they'd driven the herd into the killing cave.
A hungry fury was gibbered in the dark as the red folk ran wild. And down a
tunnel she’d stumbled with them, panting, maybe back the way she’d come,
her ears filled with the piping and the screams. The coughs of bullocks.
Dying cattle.
The red people had worn masks. They’d grunted through headpieces
made of bristles and sticks and hair. Inside the eye sockets their white eyes
had bulged. The red-limbed folk had stunk, all fouled by the corrupted flesh
from the tatty remains in the pit of bones, the place where they offered
succour to the terrible laughing dogs. But Jess had run with the red folk
and run red with their rage, their eternal rage. She’d reddened and run past
nightmares mapped upon the walls. She’d run with the past, she’d run into
the future.

The torch was long gone, knocked from her hand, but it wasn’t needed
when a moon’s silver light gave the land below new form and showed faces
not seen by day. She ran from there and back to here, crossing a border, a
boundary beneath the ground.
Eventually, a late sun, coin-sized at the mouth of a tunnel, had led her to
the surface and returned her to where the ivy cascaded over the scraped
walls of the quarry; where buddleia splashed the greenery purple with
heavy flowers nodding. And there she had lain until the sun had sunk and
the world above the ground was as dark as it was below.
She’d returned to the farm and Tony had wanted to know where the girl
was. Her man’s first thought had been of Maddy, his peasant mistress: the
girl whom Jess had left under the ground with the great frighted herds that
had been run by the red folk unto their gods in the pit of bones. Jess had
understood this instinctively. The red folk had formed a circle beyond the
herd to guide it inwards, before fleeing, lest they too became quarry.
She’d fled with the red people from a place where all had shown the
silver moon their devil faces.
The girl, Maddy, was back with the upright white bitches. She would still
have been amongst their busy, wet muzzles and below the sharp pink teats
of their pregnant bellies: those pale hounds that had walked upright like
men whose words had opened Jess’s eyes so wide that she’d seen in the
dark and so far back in time. And their jabber had opened the ground wider
to summon another too. She’d not seen that one, but had heard it; though
poor Maddy may have laid her pretty eyes upon what had come out of the
crevice.
At the farm, Jess had told them all of this.
There was an argument about the drugs, about the gear being bad. The
manager and photographer had gone into the ground with torches, where
she’d been, and they’d returned with no blood in their cheeks. The manager
had been sick all down his bottle-green gabardine trousers.
‘I told you. I told you,’ she’d cried at them. ‘Isn’t it incredible?’ But all
they’d found was a dead girl, Maddy, who’d crawled a long way in terror
until her young heart had stopped beating. God knows what had crawled
alongside her because the look on her face had made the photographer sit
down, unable to speak for the rest of the evening.
Dead and stiff, Maddy Gross had been cold in a way none could account
for, her final thoughts clearly crippled by what she’d seen: that had been

frozen onto her face like a mask. Her eyes had been filled with it. All the
guests, save Ade, left the farm. Ade had loved Jess.
Tony had then gone below with Ade, whom he thought he could trust and
who’d played in the band longer than anyone, and they’d brought the dead
girl above ground in a wheelbarrow that Ade had fetched from the old barn.
And like a couple of schoolboys suspected of stealing, they’d dumped the
evidence at the edge of the farm and then stayed up all night muttering and
drinking to get their stories straight for when the time came.
Later that summer, Jess found the masks.

46
Trees sheltering Helene’s hesitant progress through the wood ended at a
wooden fence, the railings encompassing muddy ground before a black barn
with no doors.
Inside the paddock’s rectangle of churned red soil three farm animals lay
on their sides. All were motionless save a weary flick of a single black tail.
An equine head then reared, the eye of the animal wild with agony. The
creature’s ears were flat, its mane matted with soil. Ponies.
Three black ponies. Two full-size, one smaller, maybe a foal. Two of
them were dead while the third had little life remaining. From what she
could see from behind the fence, Helene doubted that any animal would
survive the injuries inflicted upon the tortured statements of their bodies.
From the still moving pony, purple and ruddy coils, rubbery and moist,
spilled from a once rotund belly and steamed in the mud beside what looked
like a fleshy bag the colour of an aubergine. Part of the second adult pony’s
throat was missing. A red sash of soft tissue gaped where the underside of
its neck should have been.
Her legs threatened to give way. Helene slumped against the top rail of
the fence. Whatever had done this might be nearby. She thought of the
police car outside the gates and suddenly craved being locked inside it.
Though was a windscreen sufficient defence against what had slaughtered
these animals so rapidly? Their terrible wounds suggested a killer wielding
a power as swift as it was tremendous: and what size of mouth could
remove so much of a pony’s throat?
Helene peered into the dilapidated wooden barn behind the paddock.
Nothing moved inside the dim interior but she could make out the lifeless
shapes of at least three dogs. They appeared to have been squashed or
pressed into the soil. Kent?
Dangerous animals had slaughtered the ponies and dogs: the very things
she’d heard in the distance cackling and growling and yapping so horridly
while engaged in this dreadful butchery. And there had been people at this

despicable farm. So where were they? Where were the two police officers
who’d accompanied her here?
A second police vehicle, an estate car, screamed down the lane towards
the paddock, its blue light casting an icy swirl over the treeline.
Helene moved up to the lane, both hands gripping the fence’s top rail to
support her bloodless legs. As she handed herself along the top rung, her
spine tensed at the prospect of a terrible form rushing out of the barn’s
gloom. None came, but only then did she realise that the third and smallest
pony was missing its head. That she spotted near the body: a black, shaggy
lump, red at the breach where it had been sundered from the neck, the black
muzzle grinning at the moment of destruction.
The police car passed as Helene arrived at the verge of the lane. The
presence of more police officers was reassuring, and the part of her mind
that still functioned beyond shock compelled her to seek out the two
constables who’d brought her here. They could explain her presence to their
colleagues. But more than anything she found herself desperate to know
that they were safe: they’d been so young. They’d rushed into this dreadful
place to apprehend her tormentors. Though, given the state of the ponies
and dogs, she did wonder how they could be safe.
Beyond the ponies’ paddock the police car’s siren pipped and fell silent.
Car doors slammed, one following another. Neither officer who climbed
from the vehicle spoke until one of them muttered ‘Jesus.’ A name carrying
more weight when uttered in such despair.
Somewhere beyond what was visible to Helene, the groaning of the
injured man finally concluded. But the man talking kept up his strange,
interrogatory monologue and the solitary woman continued to weep. There
were survivors. At least two. The police must have found them.
In the wake of the patrol car, Helene inched closer to these sounds of
human distress. Further inside the farm, if she could stand to look, she’d get
a better idea of what had just happened. For Lincoln, for the painfully
obscure reasons why three men had tried to drown her at sea, for why the
landlady of a guesthouse had painted her naked flesh red and shrieked like a
chimpanzee, she had to see, to understand, to know. The need was now
maddening.
From her vantage point in the middle of the private road the roofs of
several other buildings emerged from tree cover: uneven rows of grey slate
scales topping a row of ramshackle structures. During her first visit she’d

seen them in the distance. Men had wandered out of them and idled in the
road.
Maybe there had been a detonation of some kind because the
agricultural buildings were damaged. Smoke drifted from out of the largest,
a stained, rickety barn.
Silently, Helene walked past the stationary, empty police car. It was
parked outside the gaping doorway of the smoking barn where a red man
sat slumped. He either spoke to himself or was speaking earnestly to the
mess of innards gathered in his lap. His entire body was red, both from the
blood that had escaped his torso and from the same pigment she’d seen on
the skin of her abductors at the guesthouse.
The two police officers who’d just arrived stood motionless on either
side of the slumped, disembowelled and, impossibly, still living form.
Ten metres in front of their car, another body lay in the road. Black
trousers, boots, utility belt and a white shirt marked the body as belonging
to one of their own: a police officer. The body of the male constable who
brought her here, and who’d raced into the farm to investigate the woman’s
scream, was now headless.
The two living police officers weren’t sure what to address first: their
decapitated colleague or the muttering figure sitting outside the barn, who’d
been opened down the front like a cardboard box but who somehow
remained alive, though his mind must have blown like a fuse at the sight of
what now glistened between his legs.
Down the lane, about twenty metres further, Helene spotted the thin
scarlet form of an elderly man. He was missing an arm and paced slowly,
his destination inexplicable, as was the thin flute-like object he clutched in
his remaining hand.
Only when this slowly walking figure collapsed sideways did the police
officers move. They'd seen him too but been unable to react. One officer
hurried back to the patrol car and ducked inside to operate the radio. The
second officer moved to the boot. He rummaged inside then raised a shelf
from under the vehicle. With a lid propped open Helene saw the dull shapes
of firearms fixed by Velcro straps.
Such was their preoccupation and her mute, motionless shock, they
never noticed her standing on the other side of the lane.
Inside the barn the embers of a fire glowed upon the earth. What
appeared to be another scattering of bodies lay about the soil floor. The

parts that Helene could see of the corpses were unclothed, the bare flesh
darkened. Incongruously, a wheelchair lay on its side at the mouth of the
barn.
Armed with a small submachine gun one of the police officers returned
to the carnage. The second officer retrieved a pistol from the boot, produced
a torch and joined his colleague. Silent and immobile in disbelief, they
stood in the fetid, smoking mouth of the dilapidated building for a moment
and then entered.
Helene sat down on the tarmac. She wouldn’t shout in case the police
officers shot her.
Weariness engulfed her body. She listened to the sounds of the
policemen inside the barn. One of them came back outside. Hands on
thighs, his face as pale as cream cheese, he bent over and was sick into the
mud. Smoke trailed after him and Helene’s sinuses identified the intense
pungency of burning cannabis.
Three dead ponies, three dead dogs. Dying or dead people who’d
suffered catastrophic injuries. She recalled the distant sound of what might
have been a rumbling explosion, transforming into a sustained grinding of
stone below the ground, like an earthquake.
If an explosion had occurred under the earth’s surface then how did the
male police officer end up in the lane, missing his head, and why had those
dogs been flattened into the soil? There was no sign of the WPC.
Helene’s imagination wanted to envisage, and believe, that there had
been an explosion, one that had laid waste to the occupants before a
shockwave tore through the lane and paddock to inflict such horrific
injuries upon people and animals.
Though why were the ramshackle buildings still standing? And how
would an explosion account for the bestial baying and the cries of bloodlust she’d heard?
Confused and sickened by it all, Helene felt a sudden need to be at
home, holding her little girl tightly. It was so sharp that the desire made her
dizzy.
The slumped man against the wall of the barn moved. His tattered head
fell over his rouged chest as if he were taking a closer look at the foul
spillings coiled upon his thighs.

47
A few minutes earlier.
Fumes tinged blue billowed from the braziers, fogging the air, clouding
blackened rafters.
Woozy, cold with nausea, Kat scrutinised the darkness below the grille.
Her fearful survey only broken by the slow procession of the two shamans,
or whatever the animal-headed psychopaths believed themselves to be and
their red acolytes assumed they were.
As before, the couple’s thin bodies were weighed down by shaggy,
oversized headpieces. Their stringy forms were naked, painted red. Tony
Willows weaved about, greeting his followers, withered and spindly, his
arm held by his daughter, Nanna, who was unmasked. They’d emerged
from somewhere in the back, beyond the pyre, but Kat couldn’t see a door
in the smoke. The second elder was rolled into the barn in a wheelchair,
through the front. Jessica Usher.
Jessica’s wheelchair was pushed by her weasel-faced son, Finn. He was
unmasked. The wheels of the chair carved soil and dung.
Raising a shrill handful of notes inside the stinking wooden cavern, the
pipers heralded the entrance of their degenerate leaders.
Kat craved a free arm and a weapon. She wanted to have a go at them:
the resulting violence would be as much about escape as taking pleasure in
retribution. Something of that nature moved too easily about her mind now,
like a hound, sniffing and probing on a lower storey of her consciousness. It
shied from the scrutiny of reason, but she detested these signs that she was
similar to these people, even if her motives differed. At least loathing
offered relief from terror and the sickening cramps of anxiety that had been
squeezing her stomach for hours.
Six red folk, who’d backed against the walls, stepped forward and raised
reddened arms. Ululating to the roof, they seemed like tatty-head imbeciles,
beggars from a distant age who’d drunkenly failed to incite the primitive
ecstasy that once brought them such pleasure. Even if their efforts were

reinvigorated by the arrival of the two elderly figures, who were unable to
enter this place of ancient slaughter unassisted, their cries stopped short of
achieving the intensity conjured at Steve’s sacrifice.
Tawdry, psychotic, hideous and wilful: all of it. Designed to put an end
to everything she was and had hoped to be. Was any murder less glorious to
its victim?
From beneath Kat’s soiled knees, the earth rumbled again, distracting
her from the rickety performance of the mad folk in their shack. Down
below, great mounds of rock were surely shifting. Something had shaken
loose. Perhaps a fragment of the very earth was parting to reveal sinuses
best left blocked. But whatever resided below was on its way up and
closing fast. Through the grate, a long breath developed into a warm breeze
befouled by charnel fumes and unseen mouths festering with canker.
Kat screamed. Then attempted to stand up to relieve her choking terror.
But the red folk were only thrilled by her desperate cry. They knew what
neared the same surface they walked with unshod feet. Their piped notes
skirled anew to pierce their captive’s thoughts more deeply: thoughts
immediately scattering like unaccompanied children frightened by growling
dogs.
Outside the temple, voices continued to bark. Men, shouting, breathless
in their urgency and with efforts and tasks unseen within the fumesmothered barn. Engines growled as accelerators were depressed to the
floor.
Old man Willows shook off the arm of his daughter that he’d leaned
upon. He began to croak in a strangled tongue, from the throat. Maybe the
communication was part animal, part human. Whatever the frightful sound
communicated, the caterwauling of his folk followed at exultant volume.
At either side of his mangy black head, old Willows’s arms rose and
tensed. Within the open maw of the mask, between canine teeth, his mad
white eyes caught the firelight.
From her wheelchair his mate became animated, unsteady for only a
moment before a miraculous renewal of vigour and posture took hold of her
decrepit form and brought her upright.
Coquettish, the emaciated and stained form of the withered matriarch
minced from the wheelchair, wailing a falsetto that quivered at its highest
point. Such was her excitement that she slapped arthritic hands against her
doggish headgear, the knuckles red lumps, the fingers cramped and

unmoving. Then she turned round and round on the spot, horribly, like a
starving child, blood-mired and participating in a Satanic party game. Her
bony feet pranced upon the dirt.
A skull-cup was carried down the grand chamber, held aloft by Finn, the
weasel son. Nodding, he passed and offered communion to each of the eight
red fools who still screeched or piped, their grotesque noises old strings
designed to draw a most unspeakable company from out of the earth.
All supped deep from the cup to dull the arrival of what was scampering
through the hidden shafts of rock below: more than one beast, rising from
the tunnel in haste to reach the grille upon which Kat paced and peered into
the darkness between her feet.
Had the barn door been closed? Had the rags of the feeble sun finally
passed behind rain clouds? Maybe the anticipation of what unfolded
promised to be unbearable for a celestial body of light and warmth.
Darkness turned the barn into a hollow vessel and a void poured between its
shanty walls, from above, from below.
Beyond her head and at ground level the edges of the wooden structure
disappeared from sight. Only the fire cast a radiance, and those weak flames
offered feeble reassurance in such abject darkness: there was no protection
or warmth otherwise in the stinking barn or the human skulls that wailed
about her. Perhaps the fire’s proximity to the grate was even a form of
protection to those who conducted the ceremony. Maybe this light and heat
were intended to keep one thing from another during a hideous interaction:
to separate the worshipped from its worshippers. Instinctively, Kat drew as
close to the fire as she was able without catching alight.
White pups. Was it those she could now hear? Grunting through the
earth, then yelping and yapping and laughing as they scampered closer,
until, directly below her feet, a whinny issued from pitch darkness. Long
did it warble before descending the scales to a mocking snigger: a
monstrous giggle underwritten by a wet growl.
Claws raked stone in the chute below. Large forms leaped and scratched
at the grate. Kat’s bonds kept her in place so that her terror could be inhaled
and her succulence surveyed by what frolicked under her toes.
The fresh stench from the pit was withering, a slurry of old blood, the
choking ammonia of dung: a gust of rot distilled and fermented by age in an
airless cavity. She was sure the red earth’s foul breath alone would suffocate

her and she desperately wanted to be overcome by the gas so that she would
not endure the sight of what had produced it.
As two pairs of hands grasped her limbs and tugged her to the side of the
grate, Kat screamed so hard she matched the idiotic, primitive cries of the
two shamans and the cacophony of their shrieking red folk.
Facing the soil with her toes scraping the ground, her body was pulled
forward. One of her hands risked dislocation from the wrist as the rope
pulled taut.
Through locks of drooping hair, she saw firelight battle with shadows in
a narrowing circumference of light. Where it flickered, hoary feet and
creosoted shins staggered about her. And then she was in position upon the
killing floor.
Inappropriately sleepy, she wondered if her body had issued an
anaesthetising drug of its own to dull panic. Then she recalled a particular
image that she’d suppressed for days. It snapped her alert: a glimpse of an
old mouth, the chin deeply lined, suckling on a wet jawbone to extract
nourishment. Steve.
Kat screamed, but this time she screamed until she thought her lungs
would tear like paper bags.
From her wrists and ankles the bindings were severed. She kicked
herself to her knees. Only two of the red folk were restraining her while a
second pair made a drunken attempt to raise the grate. Once open, they’d
throw her parts down or discard her whole unto whatever yapped and
growled so impatiently inside the pit.
Kat reared and threw her body around in an attempt to free her arms,
limbs gripped by the insistent claws of two men who swayed like addicts.
‘No!’ she shrieked.
The two fools raising the grille ignored her and continued to heave the
trapdoor free, their arms trembling from the weight of an iron cap designed
to keep below separate from above.
From the near distance, perhaps outside the barn doors, a man shouted,
‘Filth! Pigs is fucking here!’ It was repeated by another two voices, raised,
breathless.
Within moments, a motorbike was kicked into grunting life. Car doors
slammed. But those who held her seemed unaware of the commotion
outside. The two pipers were seated now too, their eyes turned inwards as if
the elderly musicians were succumbing to long overdue comas.

Beyond the widening aperture in the floor Kat glimpsed the witch-wife.
She was being carried like a thin child that had injured itself. In cowardly
haste, Jessica Usher’s son Finn was removing his mother from the scene,
away from the raid but also, surely, from what was contained within the pit.
The couple vanished into darkness at the rear of the building.
Tony Willows’s former frailty reclaimed his scrawny form and he
clawed at his daughter’s arm pathetically. A sudden desperation to flee the
barn had gripped him while his distracted and intoxicated underlings still
toiled about the hole, to get it open and her inside.
The last two members of the family vanished into the murky rear of the
building where Tony had first emerged so pompously. The family were
leaving her in the clutches of their dazed but committed congregation, an
aged and motley assemblage that appeared unaware of their priesthood’s
retreat and the alarms raised in the lane outside the building. The substance
in the skull-cup must have been potent, its effects increasingly evident in
the clumsy stumbling around her body. And if the grate moved any further
she was no longer destined to be the only victim here. ‘No. They’re leaving.
Look! For Christ’s sake, look!’
Amidst the chaos came the most piercing animal shriek from below, one
so full of inhuman excitement that Kat’s theories of fighting dogs and great
cats collapsed with no possibility of revival.
As if finally coming to their senses about what they were almost
certainly going to set free, the two men released the grille partway open and
stumbled back from the hole they’d opened in the ground. One of them
peered about the smoky darkness like a child seeking direction from its
elders.
Inside the pit, the scrabble of what tore at the underside of the metal
seal, now only covering one third of the aperture, intensified, as did the
chorus of snarls. Those who’d raised the gate must have been out of their
minds and yet they seemed too stunned to completely uncover the pit, or recover it. Her jailers had become entranced or paralysed by what bayed at a
deafening volume inside the black hole.
Before she could see what they’d seen, with a surge forward Kat found
her knees and tugged one arm free. She caught a face with a fist, punching
up and through a tarred fringe of dishevelled hair that haloed hollow
cheeks.

The eyes of the man she struck were glassy. She drove her fist into his
eye-socket and he went down without a sound. Yanking her other arm with
sufficient power to pull the second man down and onto his front, she
glimpsed his bewildered face as it struck the soil. Her eyes met the eyes of
an old, confused man.
Kat ran at the fire. She ran into the flames. Within that infernal darkness,
instinct alone insisted that the fire might be the only thing at hand to
preserve distance, no matter how narrow, between men and what had so
recently appeared in their modern domain. And she’d have run through lava
in bare feet to escape what burst from the earth behind her.
The desultory piping and the calls for those beneath the ground were
over: swiftly replaced by other noises, like the ripping of the first torso, a
sound of moist cloth tearing.
The rending emerged from behind Kat’s head as she skittered through
the fire, her legs kicking up a shower of embers and a flurry of sparks.
Multiple stabs and sudden sears penetrated the jogging bottoms she’d lived
in for days. Burns pierced the soles of her feet. Hair crisped around her
face, crackled inside an ear. A vile smell swamped her sinuses. She was on
fire and she screamed and launched herself at the absolute state of darkness
beyond the pyre, landing on all fours, not on earth but on stone that rubbed
the skin off her knees.
As she turned about and slapped at the searing agony on her ankles and
feet and behind her knees, a shockwave of stinking air blew the fire flat.
Kat never saw the men who’d raised the grille come apart. Nor did she
see what it was that removed their heads, but she did hear two human
carcasses thump the walls where they’d been flung. And when the fire
briefly righted and tongued a ceiling of rocks the colour of blood, two
incomplete bodies dropped to smack the ground.
The stampede of hooves through the darkness was heralded by a roar of
shrieking animals. A herd, their rout a deafening thunder. Nothing of the
creatures was visible but the force of this rushing multitude buffeted her
face: heavy, powerful shapes plunging through the void. Had she been an
inch further out from the fire she was sure her body would have been
broken apart by trampling hooves.
Inside the black space the herd was massacred. And beyond the carnage
distant dogs squealed and horses screamed as they too must have fallen
beneath the same claws and teeth.

Devils laughed through it all and aloud, and they growled on the blood
they gulped in the way of hounds assuaging desperate thirsts in puddles.
Beyond the fire’s tiny borders, in skirts of dim light, the feeble silhouettes
of the red folk were tossed back and forth like puppets, limbs flopping. A
throat was opened far above Kat’s head and a warm broth washed her face.
She tasted salt.
A damaged figure crawled: an intoxicated piper in possession of enough
sense to realise that something had gone amiss. Kat watched this woman’s
bony back opened like pastry. The straggly head then vanished under what
might have been a great hand or a foot; it pressed her skull as flat as fresh
putty. Perhaps the limb that crushed the skull was clawed; a suggestion of a
matted leg held the remnants of her head in place so that the body could be
ribboned. The sorry carcass was swiftly peeled and emptied before Kat
could look away.
A length of timber burned beside Kat’s grubby toes. She seized it. Its
end glowed white and red with heat and ash and burned her hand. She
dropped it. Patted the length of wood for the cooler end and reclaimed the
short plank. Then turned, arcing the flame through the darkness at an arm’s
length.
The meagre light of her torch was momentarily reflected in eyes as wide
as headlights: amber amidst a jaundiced yellow, stricken with capillaries. A
silhouette found scant definition, only for a moment: a broad shadow with
great haunches that trembled behind a dipped head, the small ears pressed
flat before the shape withdrew, or vanished.
She tottered from the pyre, swinging the burning plank at waist height.
Pushing onwards, she moved in an ungainly lurch to where the world
dropped into complete darkness. There should have been soil yet stone
pressed the burned soles of her punished feet. Impossible. But curiosity had
no place in such an abattoir, nor did hesitation: the mauling and scattering
of the red folk the only testimony she required.
Savage grunts, the slopping of heavy, wet carcasses in rank air. Quarry
thrashed frenziedly against the ground, then flung against the walls,
repeatedly. A rapid scuffling of large feet. Inert forms were tugged and
fought over anew, between jaws she was blessed to never see. Kat doubted
that anything survived behind her burned heels.
About where she guessed the entrance must have once been, she heard
new voices. Distant, urgent cries of ‘Police!’ But these voices seemed to be

too far away and at the mouth of a stone tunnel. They were lost in the
reeking wind. A human voice was incapable of much besides unwisely
announcing itself to what growled about this hell; either that, or it could
scream once its presence had been acknowledged. As these new voices
briefly did.
A rumble below the ground passed away; a vast wave chased by the
bestial screams that had arisen from the pit. The whinnying, terrified herd
retreated with the tremor. Their cries rapidly subsided and withdrew to an
impossible distance as if swept from where the barn had been. The noises of
the devils going about their butchery were no more, the screams of their
quarry ended. The earth beneath her feet was dense and silent once more.
The departure of the unnatural atmosphere and whatever had scampered
through it had been as swift as its coming.
Murmurs from the ordinary world, birdsong or traffic, however,
remained absent. Kat imagined the earth breathless and mute with shock.
Only the moans of the dying and the inexorable pattering of the rain upon
the roof tiles disrupted the silence.
Keeping her feet, she followed where Tony and his invalided wife had
run. This had been an endgame that had only spared the perpetrators.
Maybe they’d lost control of what they’d directed onto their property. Once
it was out, she didn’t believe anything capable of holding that back.
The kindling she clutched still glowed and what remained of the pyre
flickered against walls of wood once more, timber walls instead of stone.
She’d been returned to a recognisable place; her smarting feet stumbled on
damp soil, the coolness a sudden balm.
Against a far wall a faintly lit rectangle of thinner air suggested an exit:
the aperture through which the Willows family had made their undignified
escape, leaving all behind to be mauled in a sudden manifestation of horror.
Traumatised but still functioning, carried by unsteady legs, Kat passed
through the door and entered a cement room, its weak light celestial in
comparison to the barn’s unnatural darkness.

48
‘Much further?’
‘Not far, mother. We’re out soon. The seventh door is close.’
‘You’re tired, my boy. I’ve been such a burden. I can’t breathe in this.
Take my face from me.’
When she finally found the farmer’s son so many years ago, that dear
boy with the yellow eyes, he’d told her what the masks were for. In his wild
tales, he’d explained how Redstone was a path and he’d helped Jess follow
it.
Mottled, black, bristly, made from dogs but fashioned to resemble other
things, the masks had always been old. But how old even the youth couldn’t
say.
The masks had the smell of smoke and damp stone, dust and layers of
dried fear. Their scent filled any space they were brought into, grinning.
Jess had found them in an outbuilding, inside the drawer of a scuffed
bureau: an article of furniture exiled in a stone building you could only
enter through the barn nearest the house. Her nose had led her to the
headpieces as she’d searched for poison to kill the rats that had scampered
the living spaces of the farmhouse.
Instead of poison, she’d found the masks, the flints and the little figures:
knapped stones shaped like big teardrops and figures shaped from clay, laid
beside the masks. They’d all been folded inside a piece of antique silk with
a lace border.
The three figurines were additionally wrapped in newspaper. She’d
known at once that they were associated with the cavern and the paintings
on its walls: she’d seen similar walking below the ground.
After the night when she’d been so deep with the cuckoo girl, Maddy
Gross, and for the next seven months, what had followed her from the
ground had clung to her mind like a strange spell, infesting her sleep with
pictures and scenes that were someone else’s dreams: she’d watched much
transpire under vast, white skies far younger than those beyond her
bedroom windows. Sometimes she’d stood with others in a darkness

flickering red with firelight and the red had flourished in her, surging
through her heart like a new blood.
She was thrilled by a sense that there was a flowing without a
destination or an end in the cool silence of the quarry tunnels. Waking from
strange dreams she was tempted to dive again into the black spaces beneath
her home. Only the death of the girl, and her fear, bade her keep her
distance from the old burrows.
But Jess had removed the treasure from the bureau and carefully placed
it inside a bag. She’d taken it to the youth with yellow eyes whose father
had sold the farm to Tony. The farm should have been the boy’s inheritance
but there had been so many debts.
Jess had looked for his father first but learned of his passing from a
woman in a guesthouse outside Divilmouth. His son had drifted to
Plymouth where he’d occupied a single room in a grimy subdivided house.
A place for the poor and the broken.
When she’d found him, the boy wasn’t surprised to see her, and Jess had
suspected he was simple or mentally handicapped and should have been in
care. He’d sat alone on a fusty bed as if waiting to be collected by a relative
or guardian who’d not arrived. What few clothes and possessions he owned
had been folded neatly inside a suitcase. Empty jugs of cider had lined the
scuffed furniture. Windows closed, curtains drawn, smoke from his pipe had
coated everything in the dismal room with the smell of his father: the same
pervasive, enduring odour of the sitting room at the farmhouse.
This sweet, gentle youth with yellow eyes had said nothing other than
‘Come in’ when she’d knocked at his door. In a room at the end of an unlit
passage that had reeked of gas, he’d watched her with a steady, bright gaze
while she’d asked her questions about the place under the farm. He wasn’t
moved to offer answers but his expression became grave.
Unpacking her bag as carefully as it had been filled, Jess had asked him
why he and his father had left the artefacts at the farm: the masks, flints and
figurines. She’d laid them upon the threadbare carpet of the dismal room,
but still the young man had offered nothing. His silence had only made her
frantic to know what the things were used for. Everything was connected:
the youth, her, the dead cuckoo girl Maddy, the crude objects, the painted
chamber.
Eventually the thin young man had turned his slow, yellow eyes to the
window. A gaze containing no emotion, judgement, respect or contempt: the

look in his eyes the same as they had been the day they’d exchanged
contracts at the farm, while the slow father had showed Tony his new
fiefdom. Because the youth was simple and clearly unfit for the world
beyond the farm that he’d left behind in the patient, resigned manner that
he’d taken from his father, Jess had decided to leave.
She’d gathered the foul masks, the blue-black flints and the three
carvings of the big-bellied women with the heads of animals. The thrill born
of mystification about where she was living, exciting her more and more
since the day the girl had died, prompted her to take the objects back home
where they’d always been. Each piece was shiny with wear.
Once the objects had been cleared away, the youth with yellow eyes had
finally spoken. ‘The dead lass they found was down the red.’
‘She . . .’ Jess hadn’t been sure what to say. The incident had been in the
newspapers. Everyone involved had lied, consistently, to the police about
where the girl had died and about who’d given her drugs. But reporters had
amassed outside the farm. Tony was facing charges of manslaughter and
possession. There was going to be a trial. His panic and despair had
reached levels she’d never seen before, and now he was back in the hospital
and she was alone at the farm.
She’d tried to sell the land but local buyers had offered far less than
they’d paid for it. There had been no serious attempts at farming since
they’d been there. They didn’t know how. The buildings were falling apart.
With the last of the money, she was paying local men to tend what was left
of the flock. But if she’d admitted that the girl had died underground then
she might face charges too. No one would ever believe her story about what
she’d experienced, nor what had stopped the girl’s heart. They’d think her
even madder than many claimed she already was. And Jess wasn’t sure that
she hadn’t gone mad from her time at Redstone.
She was frightened and lonely and expecting twins within two months.
She didn’t know where they’d be born and Tony was so heavily sedated that
he’d stopped speaking. So she did what all do in uncomfortable positions:
she’d offered more questions to those questions asked of her.
‘What is the red?’ she’d asked that thin head, haloed by the light
passing through the water-stained curtains to sift the dust and curling wisps
of pipe smoke. And what the youth said made her sure that if anyone was
mad then he was. His father must have been mad too. Anyone who’d been
isolated at that farm would lose their way and never rediscover it.

The young man told her that she’d ‘made the earth grow dark’. He’d
then pointed at her swollen tummy and said that she’d ‘wet the dark earth
and taken two babs in return’.
He told her not to enter ‘the grove’ again, unless she’d ‘showed their
faces back’. Bending over he’d taken a mask from her bag with his dirty,
slender fingers and she’d imagined the dirt under his nails was from the
farm and would never wash away: that he was so darkly stained with it, like
she’d become, and as marked as the scruffy sheep that ambled about the
valleys chomping the grass flat.
He’d asked if she’d been in a church and she’d nodded. ‘Same thing at
the grove,’ he’d said, as if correcting her about something she should have
known. ‘Cover your head. Go wiv your eyes down.’ He’d reached out,
without a trace of amorous intent and tugged at her dress. ‘You don’t wear
nothing in the grove.’ Then he’d asked for her makeup, clicking his fingers
to hurry her up, to get past her frowning and puzzlement.
From the makeup bag he’d selected a red lipstick. Then gently cradled
her hand palm-down upon his own and smudged the greasy salve in long
streaks across the fine bones of her hand. ‘And all over if you’re going to
stand up in the middle of what comes round you.’ Carefully, he’d smudged
lines of lipstick into more of her skin like a salve and as he’d rubbed her
hand she’d squeezed her thighs together, her face flushing hot.
‘You’s right to take lads in the spring if you want more of them,’ he’d
said, pointing at her tummy. 'You's taken the shape.'
All of the blood in her body had eddied into a weir, a tumult, then surged
for the boy with the thin head and yellow eyes, passing its force through him
and further still. The feeling had made her giddy, yet filled her with wonder
at a future she couldn’t understand. Tears had marked her face.
He’d known, this man, just by looking, that she was carrying twins. Yet
she’d been infertile, her womb scarred by an abortion in her teens. But
she’d come out of that tunnel on the afternoon that the girl died, pregnant
with twins. They weren’t Tony’s. She’d let Ade have his way like he’d always
wanted to, in revenge for Tony’s fascination with the girl whom she’d lured
below the earth. Maddy Gross. Maddy Cuckoo.
‘What shape?’ she’d asked.
‘What comes after you give more to the red. More than we ever did you
give already. Me mum and dad wouldn’t ever give a girl or a boy. Folks
used to. They’d give it what it wants. You’re to use these for any giving.’

He’d tapped a finger on the wrapped flints. ‘And you need to be red for
them.’ The man had stroked her hands as if they were precious. ‘All over.
Red as the earth, your skin. You need a fire, else it ain’t safe. You’ve to hide
your face so you don’t drown in the red like the lassie in the papers done.’
His mad words had left her hands trembling in her damp lap.
‘The black mother and her white pups. You called them up. They’ll abide
cus of what you done. They’ve given you the centre where all gets shaped
round you. What’s done is done.’
And without a hint of mockery or sly humour or deceit in his face, he’d
told her, ‘You’s inside the old Creel now. They’ll take things from out of it
that you put inside.’ And as he said that he’d looked at her tummy.
‘What are they?’ she’d asked him, desperately, but he fell again into the
familiar deep silence and was no longer listening but thinking on what
could be done for her, as if he were a mechanic and she’d taken a broken
car into his garage.
‘They pawing the ground now?’ he’d eventually asked, tapping the side
of his slender head. ‘Up here?’
And that had made her think of how often she’d run in her dreams to
fright the herds, shepherding the herds alongside the red people with their
stinking heads of beasts: some with horns, some with feathers, but all with
the black muzzles that their wild eyes peered through. And she’d recalled
what walked the darker edges of the pit on its hind legs, their dirty white
bibs clotted scarlet. The pups would shock her awake before she ever saw
more of them in dream, or of what came roaring up from the ground behind
them. And she recalled how she would lie, panting like a dog, and shaking
with relief at not having seen more than the end of the larger one’s thin,
black legs protruding from the crevice in the pit . . . yet always wanting to
go to it, like it was her lover, her sex nearly cramping and opening.
‘I think so,’ she told the farmer’s son, who was much more than that.
And he’d nodded, sagely, as if what had been discussed between them was a
subject of consequence to him.
‘Nuffing is written down. It’s all in pictures,’ he’d said solemnly. ‘Don’t
work without a witch-wife in the middle who shapes it all about her, you
see? Takes time.’
‘Can you show me how?’ Jess had asked him with tears in her eyes,
stroking the miracle thriving in her womb. And she’d knelt before the youth,

which had troubled him. He’d asked her to stand and instead had knelt
before her, placing his mouth on her feet.
The boy with the yellow eyes came home with her afterwards, and they’d
taken his old dusty suitcases that had never belonged anywhere but upon
the red land that few wanted. And he’d shown her what his mum had done
with farm animals in the grove to fill the old Creel and what she’d been
shown by the other wives and so on, before his dad had gone for Christ and
stopped it all.
She’d learned how the sacred weapons and the music underground had
always led others to the grove of the oldest red columns, the witch-wives.
And she saw the patterns of witch-wife bones curled in the dusty nests
where they’d lain a long time. She went below with him, many times,
masked and unclothed and red and with great reverence so as not to drown
in her own blood, and she’d let the maps upon the walls fill her with
knowledge.
In the sacred grove she made the earth grow dark, from time to time,
giving succour to the pups, who fed first, to resume the old bond. And in the
parts of the earth that were still open enough and close enough to what
paced below, the youth with yellow eyes taught her how the five-fold kiss
worked and what it could do once the Creel was nourished. The first girl
who went into the red was sufficient explanation as to how she’d given birth
to the twins, Finn and Nanna, and why so many other mothers were soon
blessed too, and how the flocks had doubled in size on the farm and on the
land all around the crossroads.
The counter-clockwise steps around the red column with the sun’s low
light setting in the West allowed her to see much farther than the sea. The
rite was used when something needed to be built or planted. That movement
always stirred the pipers and opened Creel’s door.
Others came and helped with the farm and with the rites and they settled
her as witch-wife with kisses on her feet.
In the red places, once her cut flowers were bringing in an income,
along with the lambing and calving and dairy farming, across all of the
farms where the Creel was nourished and her tracks became visible again,
Jess’s place as the red column was accepted without question.
Before Finn was old enough to replace him, though his slaughter of the
youth with yellow eyes she'd thought unnecessary, she’d asked the youth for
the names of what it was that came and went beneath the earth – if called in

the right way and when carefully provisioned with ponies, lambs and sturdy
rams, all being the hue of night – and he’d said his mother had called her
Creel. Her milky pups had names you never did more than whisper. There
were other names, but those in the red grove were mostly referred to as a
pack, or a trinity: the Creel.
They had been given that name, or the name of ‘Old Creel’, many years
before, and all anyone knew now was the song about a giant in the West
who’d kept his hunting hounds in a basket filled with bones. But his hounds
were devils and had escaped and devoured the giant, as well as anything
living they’d come across, before returning to their basket.
Only the cleverest tribe of men who’d hid their delicious scent by taking
on the likenesses of the devils in the Creel, through the fashioning of their
heads and the staining of their flesh, had survived the devil hounds of the
Creel. Those men had learned to fill the capacious bellies in the Creel and
to freshen the dread basket with new bones. The hounds had then hunted
with the men as they’d hunted for the giant, and the men had fed on the
scraps.
She’d learned the song and others still known in the oldest tongues of
the West; some that could still be heard beneath the ground at certain times
along with the pipes. Soon, she’d sung them all proudly and loudly in the
old tongues that came from the back of the throat. Tony was next to useless
so Finn took the role of John Barleycorn not long after he’d been caught
offering black lambs in the grove independently of tuition. No school would
hold him so she tutored him at home until he introduced the new crop that
would sustain every red child for miles.
And by learning to see in the dark, as witch-wife she too saw that the
past was red and that the future was red for certain. That the red abided
and that all was truly red in the world and was destined to be red again.
She’d seen how red the world was at its end, which wasn’t too far away,
and she’d learned that even though much could conceal the red in every
heart, those that didn’t abide by the red were never saved.

49
Static crackle from police radios inside the barn, then a voice said, ‘Christ.
Here . . . Jesus, look at that.’
Helene kept her distance from the gaping, smoking doorway. Sickened
by what lay strewn and ruined about the dirt floor at the mouth of the
building and on the road, she remained on the lane in the drizzle, feeling
delicate and useless inside the oversized coat from the hospital’s lost
property box. Though the next time one of the constables came out of the
barn, she’d try and attract his attention. More police would be here soon
too. Ambulances. Please. Please come quickly.
She struggled to put one thought in front of another to complete short
bursts of comprehension. But disbelief and confusion mingled with the
relief that it was over. She’d survived, again. Soon she would be reunited
with her family. That’s all that mattered now.
Until a woman staggered out from between two of the decrepit farm
buildings. A person with bedraggled hair swaying in clumps about her face.
A woman stumbling on bare, grubby feet, but not painted red or naked. She
wore a hooded top and jogging bottoms: her clothing smeared with grime
and inappropriate to the weather.
In her hand she dragged a long piece of timber that smoked at one end.
She seemed intent on reaching the scrawny red arm that lay upon the lane’s
surface: an arm severed from a body.
The woman bent at the waist, emitting a gasp, and pulled something
from out of the hand at the end of the crudely amputated arm. The object
looked like a stone and the woman examined it until something in a tree
beside the lane distracted her.
Scraping a dark lug of hair from her forehead, the dishevelled woman
peered into the overhanging branches, then studied the drainage ditch at the
side of the road. As if sensing scrutiny she turned her head and looked at
Helene.
Even from a distance, recognition dawned in the mind of each woman.
The scruffy figure was Kat, the journalist.

They stared at each other some more. Inside the smear of a face,
smudged with dried blood and soil, Helene watched the awareness of who
she was dawn in the other figure’s too white, too wide eyes.
Kat shuffled about to face her. ‘Helene?’ she asked in a dry voice close
to a croak.
Helene didn’t reply. This woman had given her to the red people. She’d
lured her to this dreadful place where there had been an attempt on her life.
She’d implicated her family in this unnatural business, her little girl, her old
mum. The police in the barn needed to know that Kat was here and that she
was part of this: part of the outlandish story that she’d narrated in a hospital
bed to unbelieving police officers and detectives. Helene looked to the barn
and parted her lips to call out.
‘How did you . . .’ Kat never finished the question but said enough to
distract Helene. ‘What are you doing here? I thought they’d . . . I’m sorry,’
she said. ‘I’m so sorry, Helene.’ Kat wiped her eyes. Her body was shaking.
The hand about the wood was white, the clenched knuckles defined. ‘I had
no choice.’
Helene pointed at her, moving towards her. ‘You. I’m here because of
you.’ Her throat briefly closed with emotion, her jaw trembling, her eyes
smarting with tears. ‘Because of you . . . You did this!’ She cast her arm in
the direction of the barn. ‘The police are in there. So you stay the fuck away
from me. Don’t you bloody move, bitch.’
Tears glistened on Kat’s cheeks, diluting the filth around her eyes. The
frustration of what she wanted to say creased her face as if she was about to
cry. ‘Steve,’ Kat blurted, her voice shaking. ‘They killed Steve. In there.’
Kat pointed to the barn with her wood. ‘They cut him open in there.’ She
nodded her head rapidly to add emphasis to the memory. ‘They tried to do it
to me. In there.’ She looked at her dirty burned feet. ‘I had no choice. They
came to my home. They made me call you. Because of the recordings. I’m
sorry.’
‘Tell it to the police.’
If Kat heard that she paid it no heed. ‘They killed your brother. And
Steve. So many. I was next. The . . . things that did this . . . the murderers at
this farm brought it here. They called it.’ Kat looked up at the tree. ‘It was
just here. Out here. Oh God.’
Helene followed Kat’s gaze and saw that a dark, irregularly shaped
object was caught in the tree. At first she assumed they were empty clothes,

snagged on twigs. But when she moved to better see what was strewn
through the branches, she made out a murky human form, criss-crossed by
sticks.
At a glance the figure might have passed for a scarecrow with poorly
constructed limbs, made from poles broken at odd angles inside its sleeves
and trouser legs. Moving closer, she recognised it as the body of a man. He
either had an arm missing or it was twisted behind his back.
Before she could look away, Helene saw the thin head, half-concealed
behind the leaves, the facial expression contorted with displeasure. It was
Richey, from the boat.
Kat pointed her stick into the ditch. ‘The police have been helping them.
You can’t trust the police.’
Helene looked to where Kat now directed her attention and flinched.
‘Oh, Jesus Christ,’ she muttered, on seeing the body of the female police
constable. She recognised the woman’s petite shape and uniform but not
much else. Headless, like her partner, her body had landed on its front in the
weeds. It was also missing part of a leg, beneath the knee.
Richey now watched over the woman’s body with his sightless eyes,
while dripping from the tree in which he hung.
‘No,’ Helene said. ‘No. She was helping me. The police brought me
here. To catch the men who tried to drown me.’
What she’d said seemed absurd. But ever since her arrival in the village
of Redhill to meet this woman, and to learn about her brother’s final weeks
alive, her life had been implausible. The trend was set to continue. Helene
pointed at the tatty remnants of a man in the tree. ‘He was on the boat.’
Kat wiped at her eyes using a sleeve. ‘They were going to kill all of us.
It was the sounds from the cave. Whoever heard those recordings, or came
here and saw things, was finished.’
Hadn’t she suspected as much? That those dim, awful sounds, recorded
in a cave by her brother, were connected to this massacre? ‘How . . .’
Eyes blinking rapidly, her stained face now quivering white with anger,
Kat said, ‘Steve came here. And they butchered him. They . . . they’re not
getting away with it. They’re not.’ And with that, Kat had reminded herself
of some undisclosed purpose. She hobbled up the lane, away from the barn.
‘They came through here.’
The police officers were still preoccupied inside the outbuildings.
Helene could hear them searching one of the adjoining workshops made

from bricks and cement blocks. Kat had said they couldn’t be trusted, that
the police were a part of this. Helene found that too hard to comprehend.
She would not believe it of the two constables who had driven her here and
raced towards the smoke and the screams, only to die so horribly while
doing their duty, unthinkingly. She stepped after Kat. ‘The police. They’re
here to help.’
‘They’re not getting away with it. They left us all to die.’
Helene followed Kat at a safe distance, her mind working hard at what
the journalist had confided. ‘Kat. The police brought me here, to help me.
Now they’re dead. Both of them.’
‘A policeman brought me here too, to die. The red folk were going to
give me to it.’
When Helene drew closer, she could see that Kat’s eyes weren’t right.
She looked unhinged, the blood staining Kat’s face only reinforcing
Helene’s sense that the woman was in shock.
‘Did you hear them too? Mmm?’ Kat muttered. ‘They came from the pit
and did this.’ Kat pointed her short plank, the charred end still smoking, in
the direction of Richey’s motionless body.
Helene followed Kat to where the lane curved from view, the tarmac
increasingly concealed by outgrowths from the hedgerow. ‘It doesn’t make
sense. Kat! Stop! For fuck’s sake, Kat, stop. Where are you going?’
And before Helene received an answer, both women saw the white
house at the same time. Its front now visible through the unruly verdure at
the side of the road.
‘They went in there,’ Kat said, and staggered on, in the direction of the
big house, wincing with every step as the broken tarmac stabbed her
swollen feet.
Helene followed her to the building hidden deep within the decrepit
farm. Large and modern, the mansion’s outer walls were resplendent with
bright magnolia. Dark panes of glass caught the weak light and returned
reflections of what declined about itself: the dereliction and wild, unruly
growths. But nothing made sense any more to Helene about this land, or
those who danced in red across it, or what had emerged from beneath it.
Nor did she know who to trust or what to do any more. But was Kat
suggesting that someone, the people responsible for so much bloodshed,
had escaped from the barn? If so, then this mad woman with a stick in one
hand and a black rock in the other appeared to be pursuing them.

50
This tunnel, if Kat was to follow it any further, would take her deep
underground, where it lived. From down there the horror had burst. The
realisation was sobering. For the first time since she’d escaped from the
barn, her determination to pursue the Willows family cooled.
Rough walls of limestone led down, evoking a grim carousel of memory,
of living forms flung through the dark, the thud of their falls. A sense of
what might yet roam here, the inhuman strength of it, kept her at a
standstill.
The wooden staircase she’d not long ago descended connected a utility
room on the ground floor of the big white house to this subterranean level.
Whoever had fled down here had left the connecting door ajar: someone in
a hurry or with their hands full.
Kat fingered the black rock in her hand. Outside the barn, she’d scooped
it from a dead stranger’s fingers: an implement insufficient to the task of
defending herself against those things. And she knew of no weapon that
might offer reassurance if she should meet again what the red folk had
called Creel, let alone its young.
Kat wiped a wet hand against her trouser leg to better grip the hand-axe.
Behind her, at the top of the staircase, Helene stood in silence. She
wasn’t coming down: wasn’t going beneath the ground in pursuit of those
who’d tried to end their lives and destroyed those they’d loved.
Helene was a survivor but the girl had suffered enough. That was plain
to see. A drawn face, the manic expression and the palsy of her bloodless
hands were sufficient evidence of a woman at the end of her tether. The red
had tried to exterminate her by drowning. That’s what she’d said.
But Helene’s limbs were probably aquiver now from the shock of
witnessing what Kat had so recently done to a living man, the man with the
bad leg whom they’d found inside the big white house.
They’d come across him in one of the spacious living rooms: an
enormous area with a fireplace the size of the bathroom in her cottage. The

room had opened onto a brushed granite kitchen; the terrazzo eating bar
could have seated eight people.
The mansion had revealed itself to be a place of atriums, roof beams,
viewing walls, vast indoor plants, enormous sofas that slotted elegantly into
corners, wooden staircases inlaid with cherry, and private decks offering a
view of the distant, angry sea.
The incongruity of the house’s existence at the farm had startled them
both. How did such a palace occupy the same land as the other dilapidated,
unkempt and aged structures, all leaning earthward, at Redstone Farm? The
sale of sheep had not built the house nor its indoor pool.
Kat had glanced around as they’d shuffled inside, her raw and seared
feet cooling on the marble floors, her professional eye absorbing the lavish
interior as if it were a spread in a lifestyle magazine. Only the wealthiest
people owned places like this. Not those with moribund music careers
who’d taken to farming sheep.
She began to think differently about the nature of the land, the properties
upon it, where it all began. The buildings at the front were mere facades,
old ruins, concealing the guttural calling and the bloodletting, the dog
masks, the horrible piping, the red skin and this magnificent house. What
else was hidden here?
Redstone was not a working sheep farm in any meaningful sense. It
probably hadn’t been in years. And this gleaming palace was the
headquarters of something else, another kind of business: private, exclusive,
detached. This luxurious home was the heart that serviced the blood vessels
of a criminal network that Matt Hull and Steve had alluded to. Drugs.
There appeared to be much more evidence of the operation: these hidden
tunnels. Perhaps the burrows of the depraved even reached unto the far
cliffs and caves. But what had sustained and seemingly just destroyed part
of the very tribe that serviced it must also exist below. One thing had
crossed over into another: hadn’t Matt Hull said as much?
The authorities would never understand her story because they hadn’t
seen or heard or dreamed of what bayed and jabbered below this farm.
Those who’d encountered it first-hand had either lost their heads or were
also in league with the red but escaped the slaughter, like the man on the
sofa had been.
‘Who’s that? Who’s here then, aye? That you, Richey? That you, lad?’
Mere minutes before, the chubby man with the bad leg in the living room

had repeated himself, nervously, on hearing the entrance of Kat and Helene
into the great white house.
He’d only stopped asking questions when she and Helene had passed
through the grand atrium and discovered him propped up on a long settee,
upholstered in white leather. One of his feet had been raised by three
cushions.
No one else had been home. But when the man on the couch had seen
Helene, his round face had transformed from a hopeful yearning to
something purple-black. ‘Bitch,’ he’d barked, spraying spittle all over the
glass table. He’d known Helene. ‘You’s should have stayed drowned, cunt!’
the man had bellowed.
Wincing and wheezing, he’d struggled to his feet. Unafraid of the two
women who’d appeared before him – one covered in dried blood and dirt,
the second swamped by an ill-fitting coat and unable to stop shaking – he’d
come at them, hobbling and spitting, his short arms wheeling for balance.
Helene’s pretty blue eyes had opened wide with more than fear: she’d
been terrified. She’d turned immediately, intent on fleeing the mansion
they’d only been inside for a matter of seconds. She’d whispered, ‘He did
it. Tried to kill me . . .’
And Kat had known that like Beard and Headscarf, this man was one of
them; and he was injured. His ruddy forehead was beaded with sweat, his
leg stiff: any weight he put upon it caused him great pain.
Somehow, he’d escaped the morning’s massacre. Maybe on account of
his injury he’d remained inside the vast house. Or maybe he’d limped inside
to hide while his colleagues fled or died. Kat doubted he was a Willow: they
were whippet-thin, ferrety, anxious and posh.
At the sight of him, Kat had also remembered her own cowardice. How
she’d wronged Helene: the woman who’d trembled beside her, the young
mother whom she’d sacrificed hoping to save herself.
So Kat had grasped an opportunity to protect Helene. She’d recognised a
chance to avenge the wrongs that this man and his kind had done to a
frightened girl who’d already lost her brother: two more innocent victims of
the red.
Her entire body had suffused with a special energy. Molten and red it
had been: the red of fury, the red of a wordless rage, warming her muscles
to perform acts of unfamiliar strength and agility. A great and unwieldy
freedom had taken possession of her limbs. Engulfed by the surge, this

awakening of the blood, her conscious mind had slid, sunk away. And with
its passing had vanished the possibility of restraint. Her mindlessness had
resembled sexual arousal. She’d bathed in a nourishing glow that had beat
behind her face and she’d gone to work.
Kat had raced to meet the challenge of the wounded underling, the
agony of her burned feet briefly forgotten, and she’d punched him
backwards with her outstretched hands.
The man with the purple face and chubby, grasping hands, with the silly
childish thumbs that bristled with black hair and made her think of a pig’s
trotters, never made it past the show-home table. She’d never struck
anything so hard before; the balls of her hands caught him on the sternum
and instantly deflated him.
Bending over his half-collapsed form, with the tip of her flint knife
pointing down, she’d then hacked and felt the plates of his skull move
beneath her fist. She didn’t stop there, but aimed at his temple and his throat
and the hands that he’d raised in defence. She’d pierced them all.
Then she’d gone for the ham of his shoulders and the gammon of his
flanks. Even when the swine was down on all fours and bleating, she still
hadn’t been able to stop and she’d beaten his back like a drum. Made him
boom until his inner softness had sucked at the flint, forcing her to rip the
blade free, time after time, which had flecked her face with warmth and
patterned the white ceiling with long arcs of bright scarlet: graffiti she’d
fleetingly found beauteous.
She’d only stopped when she’d been too tired to hammer the man any
flatter or wetter against the marble tiles and the rug that he’d drenched red.
Kat had spared a few thoughts for the woman in the headscarf and how
she’d ruined her too, in the cottage, down in the tiny space between her bed
and the wall of the bedroom. The woman’s toothless mouth had cawed like
a baby bird’s but Kat had felt no sympathy. Crushing the foul-mouthed,
chubby man had been a fuller experience: then she’d felt something more
like joy, her mind half-blinded with a searing scarlet light. If she’d so much
as brushed her sex with the beautiful blue shard that she’d used to smash
open her foe, she’d have climaxed.
She’d turned to Helene after she’d finished and for a while Kat had
struggled to put a name to the woman’s face. She’d not even known herself.
Beyond the kitchen in a utility room Kat had then found a door operated
by a silver keypad, as if it concealed a safe. Before the door, the false front

of a tumble dryer and a cupboard had been left ajar.
Helene had followed her from the living room, at a distance, like a child
who’d not known better.
Despite their haste to escape, Kat had judged that the Willows family
wouldn’t have gone down if it was dangerous. That’s why she’d followed
them.
Still panting hard from her exertions in the living room, and smiling
oddly between lank laces of the dripping hair bootlacing her face, she
peered up again at the tall woman in the doorway of the cellar. In Helene’s
face she saw shock, revulsion and sheer incomprehension. Helene, Kat
decided, had not tasted the red as much as she had. Proximity was
contagion.
Without another word to Helene, Kat followed the underground path.
***
Below the earth the temperature plummeted, a vague eddy of dank air
making her shudder. Natural refrigeration.
The burrow smelled of soil and wet stone. Lights glowed orange along
the walls, all fed by a wire stapled into the moist, limestone walls. The
passage was too smooth to have been wholly formed naturally.
As if she were on ice, Kat walked slowly in a shaft that tunnelled south
of the barn. Her feet were burned in several places, though how badly she
wasn’t sure. She’d not wanted to inspect her wounds until her journey was
over. But as the adrenalin had drained from her muscles, her feet had begun
to throb with an agony that interfered with her ability to think clearly.
And the further she travelled beneath the earth, the more the madness
seeped from her mind. When the tunnel curved from sight, she again
reflected upon being in the realm of the abominations that had burst from
the earth to dismember anything within their terrible reach.
She unwisely recalled the skull of the piper in the barn: how it had been
squashed flat like a melon under a truck tyre. She felt the cold air of the
passage along her prickling arms more keenly then. She thought of Steve
too and the horrid goblet from which the red folk had supped their murky
brew. Her footsteps shortened, became hesitant. The idea of being lost
below the ground took hold of her mind.

Avoiding whatever this ancient ground had kept hidden was her priority
and yet the jeopardy she faced was equal to her need to avenge herself
against Willows and his brood. Only the weasel son would pose any serious
resistance and she calculated that he was a risk worth taking. So she carried
on, her hearing groping ahead of her.
They would receive no mercy either, because once the red holes in their
faces had been shut they’d not be calling it into the world again.
The tunnel turned once more. Around the bend there were more walls of
stone: a rough ceiling, a worn floor, mined and levelled. She doubted that
Tony could hobble much farther than this. He’d needed his daughter to
support his feeble progress in and out of the abattoir above. Last seen, his
queen had also been carried by the rangy stoat she’d sired. Such were the
burdens and the haste of their children, they’d failed to seal the door behind
them.
The deeper Kat journeyed, thicker power cables bracketed the walls,
attesting to a greater demand for electricity. When the tunnel forked, she
found a metal door buried six metres inside the rock. An annexe.
The main tunnel curved out of sight, disappearing into an unlit void.
Down there, the lights were off.
Kat listened, sniffed the air. Her instincts balked anew at the idea of
being drawn deeper inside the earth.
Instead, she returned her attention to the steel door. Perhaps she might
get lucky and find them all cowering behind it. She tugged the handle and
the door swung wide.
Opening the door was akin to drawing blackout curtains from windows
bright with sunlight.
At first she thought the door was an exit, opening onto the outside
world. But there was no rain. No diesel sky or grey air when Kat looked up
at where she thought the sun must be, where such warmth radiated to bathe
her face.
Instead of the sun, great yellow bulbs hung inside black umbrellas.
Cables looped from the rig on the ceiling and reached walls covered in
white rectangles of insulation: walls padded with what resembled floor mats
in a gymnasium. And what she mistook, at a glance, for a glade of small
ferns, carpeting the floor of a wood, were thick rows of identical green
plants.

The bright foliage grew to the height of her knees. From stalks, spiky,
blade-shaped leaves protruded. She recognised the serrated shapes of the
leaves from her time in London: silhouettes that were often printed on
merchandise and smoking paraphernalia in places like Camden Market.
Cannabis plants, their aroma overpowering. A perfume she now associated
with delirium and terror, with bloodshed.
Kat stepped inside the room and looked about herself in astonishment.
The rumours Steve had heard about Brickburgh’s illegal crops were true.
When she hadn’t wanted to listen, Matt Hull had hesitantly tutored her in
the same local criminal mythology. Redstone Farm was a drug plantation: it
concealed a vast cannabis crop beneath the ground. A red harvest grown
close to a ghastly slaughterhouse.
Whoever threatened this subterranean crop was despatched. Steve, Matt,
Helene’s brother, walkers and campers who’d strayed too close: they must
all have been deviously or ritually murdered.
This cavernous room explained why so much of the crop was
incinerated in braziers during those rites in the barn, to facilitate the
disordering of minds committing acts of such savage degeneracy. They had
produce to spare.
Had Kat suspected that nothing would ever shock her again, she’d have
been mistaken.
She recalled the sounds of the large vehicles and motorbikes that
morning and of a small aircraft landing at the farm the night Steve had been
butchered. Here was an established business. The neglected farmhouse and
dilapidated outbuildings containing makeshift cells, abattoirs: all a
functioning camouflage.
Matt Hull’s claim of local corruption was no exaggeration either and she
considered the smarmy detective, Lewis: he was on the payroll. Others
would be too; perhaps those in local government and business. How deep
did the scarlet roots of Redstone Farm reach? She could only guess but
they’d extended deeply enough to keep all of this hidden for years.
The discovery of this crop, the sheer industrial scale of the operation,
would summon everything that law enforcement commanded, near and far.
No wonder the red folk had killed with impunity to protect it. The multiple
murders, masquerading as cases of missing persons, would now require
fresh investigations. Every local report of a missing person would have to
be pursued anew. Willows’s entire operation would need unravelling.

Kat’s head hurt at the thought of what this tiny part of the world now
faced.
Uniformed officers were already on site. Soon they would be
everywhere: cordons and perimeter guards established; men in white suits
painstakingly picking across the ground, inch by inch; grisly leavings in the
barn encased in polythene tents; samples subjected to forensic scrutiny. This
would become another dig and one to rival that of the Brickburgh Caverns:
two sites of mass murder from different periods existing on the same land.
But even here, her instincts as a journalist prevailed: she knew she was
on the brink of a monumental story. A story with a final chapter that she’d
been instrumental in writing. And she vowed to find every last red tendril
that twisted above or below this ground, because she was part of this.
Unwittingly, she and her dead boyfriend and poor Helene must have
contributed to the sudden demise of the red folk and their operation.
The Willows must also have known that the end was coming. They’d
panicked at the sound of the siren. Perhaps they’d also been losing control
of whatever it was that they’d fattened below the ground. Isn’t that what
Tony had alluded to? That they’d brought it too close to the surface? Who
or what had been in control here?
How could the forces of reason ever conceive and accept what she’d
witnessed in that barn, twice? Surely her narrative would be dismissed as
the ramblings of a lunatic, a woman in deep shock, a woman who’d killed.
Her own hands were no longer clean.
Kat recalled, and so brightly that her memory glistened, what she’d
recently done in the living room of the house above. An execution.
Did I?
She squirmed with revulsion at herself. Squeezing her eyes shut, she
forced herself to blank her mind. She leaned against the nearest row of plant
beds until the wave of nausea passed.
Then moved through the crop, desperate for fresh air, her old self
reviving and waking from that half-sleep: moment by moment, she felt as if
she were breaking from a trance she’d occupied with her eyes open. What
she’d seen and done were merging, dreamlike, with the artificial sunshine
that warmed her face.
Between the parallel beds, her fingertips trailed through the spiky fronds
until she reached the door at the far end of the subterranean greenhouse.

The cave was at least thirty metres long by twenty across and as large as the
Grand Chamber of Brickburgh, hidden beside the sea.
Passing through a connecting door, where the plantation’s rows came to
an end, she entered a second chamber. The walls were darker but it was lit
from above with the same lights as the greenhouse.
From black wires, looping like skipping ropes to the far wall, great
bunches of what resembled brewer’s hops or bunches of drying oregano
hung upside down in fat bushels.
The wires on the far side of the room had been cleared of their harvest.
Detritus, similar to dried spice, littered the floor and stuck to her stinging
feet: fragments disrupted from a crop partially and hastily gathered.
At the far end of the second chamber a metal ladder ascended to the
ceiling. Kat saw it but didn’t go to it. Instead, she gaped at what was crafted
upon the chamber’s walls.
She’d seen similar murals at the exhibition in Exeter and the illustrations
here told a similar story to those on the walls of the Brickburgh Caves.
Between two dense bushels of drying weed, a squashed, doggish snout,
fashioned from haematite and charcoal, stained the wall. Red-eyed, jaws
open, the hideous jackal-head was supported by human shoulders and the
voluptuous body of a woman curved below the creature’s hirsute throat. A
figure that might have grimaced upon these walls for forty thousand years.
In their time below, had the most recent dwellers found something? A
thing timelessly vile that former inhabitants had also known intimately? A
thing they’d fed each other to, from one frozen era into another?
The scale of such a thought made Kat dizzy, and she felt the full effects
of her fatigue more keenly now than for days, and in every part of her body.
Her head teemed with horror: images of shattered bones, the tiny skull of a
child, a row of flint hand-axes, a lined mouth suckling a wet jawbone by the
red light of a pyre . . .
All of her waking thoughts and her dreams would lead here, to this farm,
and to these caves, always, for ever. And to what she’d seen.
At the foot of the ladder, before she climbed out, Kat turned and took a
final look of startled disbelief. The cave system must be truly enormous.
The coast was three miles away but the archaeologists were tunnelling
towards the farm. A physical connection between the two places must exist.
The dig had slowly and meticulously followed a route inland for three
years, moving from one buried cave to another, excavating a hidden story,

but always unwittingly heading towards the Willows clan and into the
present.

51
‘Tony, Tony, my old friend.’ The voice was muffled by a mask concealing
most of the speaker’s head, a visage incompatible with the elegant room in
which the man sat.
Through the hairy black jaws of the headpiece, small blue eyes glittered
within two fleshy beds of tanned skin, transmitting a cold, excited gaze.
Perhaps a grin was concealed by the mask, one that was mirthless.
Four ragged, breathless figures gasped and panted beneath the small dais
that the beast-headed man’s chair was raised upon.
Strong light greeted Tony Willows and his family and it made them
blink like moles; such an illumination hadn’t existed in the passages they’d
traversed for miles to get here. The natural light and white walls also
invited an unflattering scrutiny of their stained and dishevelled bodies.
They’d fled their home of decades without coats or shoes.
‘An old friend. That is exactly what I am, Adrian,’ Tony called in a
jovial, chummy tone, despite his wheezing.
Tony’s face was waxy and moist beneath what stain remained on his
features. The journey had nearly killed him but his rich voice managed to
summon itself and fill the room. A chamber tiled in white and blue from
floor to ceiling, save where long rectangular windows were divided by
Doric columns. Classical Grecian in style, this odd hexagonal space might
have been an ostentatious conservatory with a sea view.
There was no furniture in the chamber beside the two seats on the dais,
each upholstered in red velvet. Only a floor that discreetly sloped to a metal
grate in the centre suggested the chamber’s function: a form of wet room.
A hazy grey seascape existed soundlessly beyond its rain-speckled
windows. Outside and around the curious chamber, a great white building
crowned the cliffs. The impressive structure was visible through the glass
roof: a schloss perched on a cliff edge like a forward observation point.
Tony smiled, spreading his arms. ‘And to this old friend I have come to
request that an agreement be fulfilled. A pact made in better times. Old
dogs know how times change. So quickly. But there you have it.’

‘All over, is it, Tony?’ The masked figure asked.
‘Aye, all over.’
‘No time for a last encore?’
Tony bristled at that remark as if he wanted no reminder of his musical
past.
Finn held his mother in his thin arms like she was his babe. He
grimaced, his ruddy face streaked with sweat. ‘Would a chair be too much
to ask for? You can see who we have here!’
The masked figure turned his attention to the younger man but only for a
moment did his stare linger. All four guests tensed. The eyes within that
doglike maw had ratcheted from spiteful mirth to something even less
appealing, like wrath, before relaxing. ‘A chair for the witch-wife of
Redstone,’ the masked figure called out, his tone droll, irreverent,
dismissive. ‘She’s missing her throne.’
From the rear of the room, one of the two men who flanked the closed
entrance opened a white door and stepped outside.
A second masked figure sat beside Adrian in an identical chair. A
woman who turned her head and muttered something to him. She was
dressed in white jeans and an expensive print blouse, her pampered feet
strapped into jewelled sandals of golden leather. The fingernails of her idle
hands were painted red. Adrian wore a blue cotton shirt, tan chinos and
leather loafers without socks.
Had the couple not been wearing the mangy and frightful animal masks,
which seemed to have been plucked from a props wardrobe in an
unappealing theatre, or from the basement shelves of a museum of
curiosities, they would have passed as a wealthy couple relaxing before a
private view of the sea.
One of the chamber’s doors opened and closed, readmitting the retainer
who’d gone outside. He returned with a patio chair and carelessly dropped
it beside Finn and his mother.
‘Taken by surprise, eh?’ Adrian asked, grinning through his black
muzzle. ‘News travels. But how much did you get out, Tony?’
Tony looked to Finn, who answered. ‘Enough.’
Tony shrugged. ‘They came sooner than we anticipated.’
Adrian sighed. ‘You trust imbeciles with a job and you get an imbecile’s
work. She swam, Tony. From way out. That girl with the recordings. The
woman whose brother managed to instal microphones on your land in broad

daylight. And from where you dropped her in the water, she swam back to
shore. All that way by herself. Can you imagine it?’
‘Impossible,’ Finn said.
Ignoring him, the masked man continued to address only Tony.
‘Fishermen yanked her out near Slagcombe. She’s been in Divilmouth
Hospital overnight. From there she was taken by the police to the gates of
your proud establishment earlier today. That beating but much exposed
heart of your operation.’
Tony and his son exchanged glances.
Adrian’s eyes twinkled with competitive, triumphant amusement. To
increase their embarrassment and misery, the man in the mask continued to
explain their failings. ‘We had word from the hospital early this morning. I
doubt you were even awake when the news came in. And I assume you
wasted valuable time today, preparing one of your barbaric rites for the
journalist. The one you also failed to deal with. By all accounts, she
escaped from your care too. You had her on a platter and yet she escaped.
Our mutual friend Louie brought us up to speed.’
‘We got her again,’ Tony said.
No longer encumbered by his mother in his arms, Finn stepped forward.
His fists were clenched. ‘You knew. You knew the girl we threw in the
drink survived? You never warned us?’
Tony touched his son’s arm gently to bid him be still. ‘She’s gone now,
this hack, to the red. She won’t be coming back.’
The shaggy head upon the throne nodded sagely, the motion grotesque.
‘Yet you waited until this morning to deal with her. You felt it prudent to
wait because of your recent profligacy in matters of the red. You couldn’t
risk another death so soon after that photographer and the paraglider and the
girl in the water. Have I missed anyone, Tony? Hmm? How many people
have been taken on your land, or near it, by those painted chimpanzees up
at that landfill that you call a farm?’
Finn took another step at the little dais. ‘The fuck! Who are you to
question us?’ His voice was shrill, verging on unpleasantly feminine.
‘Son!’ Tony said, reaching for his arm. The father’s hand was evaded.
Beside the door the two men stood straighter.
The figure on the throne ignored Finn’s aggressive posturing and kept
his eyes upon Tony. ‘Who knows what these bitches know or what they’ve
jabbered to their confidants? Who can truly say what is known and what is

not known now and by whom? It’s always been the way with you, old boy.
Insecure. And if the events of this morning are anything to go by, I imagine
all of us will suffer the consequences sooner rather than later. The whole
area, every crop will have to be erased. Scorched earth. All of it.
‘So I’ve given this some thought, Tony. I’ve been forced to, even though
I’d rather have been doing something else. But I arrived at an interesting
conclusion. Hear me out.
‘We’ve paid off our debt to you, by protecting your situation for as long
as possible, given your errancy, your indiscipline. I don’t think I’m being
unfair. We’ve done more for you than you’ve ever done for us. You
connected us but we’ve carried you for years, particularly on distribution.
So it is you that has accrued the real debt and you no longer have a pot to
piss in, do you? Your accounts will be frozen by teatime. Assets seized.’
Tony’s jaw trembled. He tried to swallow whatever had blocked his
throat but didn’t seem able to raise the strength. He appeared to be
paralysed by a sense of injustice, by the terms of an imminent betrayal.
He’d never liked Adrian. The man had expanded the business but he was a
detestable snob. He’d always been dangerous too and a tricky bastard, but
he was their most powerful neighbour and had guaranteed sanctuary if ever
they’d needed it.
Finn suffered no qualms about his behaviour as a guest. ‘What the fuck!
Sanctuary has been requested! You don’t question it, you grant it! We want
somewhere where we can clean up, before any decisions are made about
what happens next. You’ve no fucking idea what we’ve had to do to keep it
in the ground.’ He pointed a thin red arm at the elderly woman he’d placed
on the chair. ‘My mother is exhausted. You haven’t a clue how volatile it’s
become, or what we’ve given to keep it down. To placate it . . . We must
have just lost another eight people. You talk to us about heavy lifting? You
haven’t any idea, fucking around the harbour with your toy boats while we
take the risks!’
Sitting upon what increasingly resembled thrones, the two masked
figures merely appeared amused by Finn’s outburst. They laughed, though
humourlessly. Adrian even slapped his thighs and when he next spoke it
was to Tony again. ‘You honestly believe that your shanty town is some
kind of mother country? Hmm? And that we all look up to it? That being
closer to the queens of old endows you with some divine right? Did you
presume that we are your subjects, old man?

‘They’re digging their way inside your fetid bowels from those caves at
Brickburgh, day by day. Coming right at you through the red earth. You’ve
trespassers all over your farm, like ants because you left the sugar out.
You’re careless. You lost touch, Tony, a long time ago and you let this
psychotic run things.’ He indicated Finn with one lazy hand, without
deigning to look at him.
‘To be so careless at such a time when things are so good for all in the
red, near and far. The ecstasy must be contained, channelled. You’ve always
over-indulged. It’s in your background, excess.
‘There are times and places for the red. And you’ve been warned, Tony.
Plenty of times. You listened to that mutt of a son too much. And your wife
is senile. To be frank, I’m disgusted.’ Inside the doggish, hairy snout of the
mask, the little tanned nose wrinkled to emphasise its point.
Too angry to speak, Finn Willows turned and gazed at his mother. He
shook his head in exasperation as if the man’s temerity in criticising his
family defied belief.
‘We know how to run this business,’ the masked woman at Adrian’s side
said, with an air of self-satisfaction.
‘Shut your mouth, tart!’ Finn cried out, his voice breathless with
exasperation. ‘You employed that bitch and the dickhead with the camera.
They’re on you!’
Adrian beckoned those at the door with a flick of his wrist. The two men
stepped forward on command. Each man was stocky with a weathered face,
over fifty, dressed in expensive yachting slickers and jeans. Besides a sullen
determination, their eyes were blank.
Neither man said a word as Tony’s son turned to face them. ‘What’s
this? Are you fucking crazy? Adrian!’
A few feet from Finn the two retainers lurched. The struggle was short.
Before Finn managed to raise an arm he was snapped over. Whining in
pain, he was separated from his family.
Adrian stood up. Rotated his shoulders, stretched his back. He stepped
from his chair and came to stand before Finn, who spat at him as much as
spoke. ‘You bastard. You bastard.’
‘No, I think you’ll find that you and your sister are the only bastards
here. One can only guess at who it was that mounted your mother back in
the day, amongst the fucking sheep.’
‘Adrian!’ Tony stepped forward.

Nanna looked to her aged father beseechingly, as if she expected him to
bring this scene to a swift end.
Adrian ignored Tony. He spoke to Finn directly, though still casually as
if he were merely discussing sports equipment. ‘You always stuck with the
bout coupé up at your place. The original Neanderthal hand-axe.
Traditional, you’d probably claim, when used for butchery. But when I feel
the red, I tend to favour a leaf-shaped point, with a razor-sharp edge. I like
to go deep, Devensian deep, you could say. I’m not a bludgeoner, Finn.
None of us are, over this way. We’ve more restraint, more precision.
Qualities that you baboons have always lacked.’
From the small of his back Adrian produced a long piece of dark flint
chipped carefully into a spear blade.
‘Cease!’ Jess finally called out from her chair, her voice frail yet
imperious. ‘You don’t know the red. You never did, Adrian. You only know
what I’ve shown you. The shallows. The river bank. Not the depths where
your blood would run so cold. We’re in the depths now. All of us. The cycle
was started when you were but a baby. So enough, or you’ll know a rage as
red as this earth. It’s so close now. It never abates. It abides. So don’t you
go thinking that I can’t bring it here.’
Adrian looked up, grinning. He raised his voice to be heard over the
woman’s snarling son. ‘What did you tell me, Jess, right at the very
beginning? How did you explain it? Let me see if I can remember. Ah, yes,
it was when you set an example with that druggy, the one with the
microphones. You said that the only thing that mattered, the only thing that
counted, was survival.
‘You said the tribes must always be pitiless to survive. Survive. And did
one ancestral people not always succumb to another? Over and over again,
right here? It’s our story, dear. You said so yourself.
‘And this is a time of plenty, not struggle. Or it was. None of this should
even be happening. But some of us have not reached the end yet. We won’t,
not for some time either. Your sources are imprecise.
‘You see, you’re not alone, Jess. Not as the wife. There are others. The
red favours strength, nothing else and it’s been reaching out, further west,
while your glorious era approached its sell-by date. Problem is, you never
recognised it. You entered a most typical period of . . . degeneracy. Alas,
history just repeats itself. We’ve all seen the writing on the walls, down
below.’

Adrian seized strands of Finn Willows’s hair, wisps clotted together with
haematite, and raised the head as if he were holding a lamb in a
slaughterhouse.
The action of his arm beneath Finn’s ear was swift, the sawing back and
forth. But the sound of the practised despatch was lost beneath the screams
of his twin, Nanna Willows, which filled the elegantly tiled room to the
rafters.
Tony fell to his naked buttocks, his old face aghast, his eyes glassy, and
watched his son’s blood stream hotly and splash brightly onto the tiles.
Scarlet tributaries rushed for the grate.
As Adrian worked, he spoke through clenched teeth. His porcine eyes
within the doggish maw were truly awful to behold as the red came upon
him: vicious and bestial but alight with an intelligent purpose that eschewed
compassion.
The cutting process seemed to last longer than it actually did and the
Willows family beheld it with only the dregs of their earlier intoxication
serving to dull their communal horror. And when the head of the heir of
Redstone Farm was entirely severed from his bony shoulders, it was raised
aloft by its sodden pony tail.
Finn’s one good eye remained fixed upon his folk with a look of
surprise. His bearded jaw feebly twitched at the air but he’d already said his
last.
From the chair his mother wailed. A terrible sound that might yet
reverberate beneath the earth to echo through hidden, lightless spaces and
vibrate along the old stone walls tunnelling below.
Tony Willows tried to join her in this old lament but lacked the breath to
form the customary chorus. He looked winded and broken at the death of
his son, an act he hadn’t imagined possible until only a few moments
before.
The men who’d held Finn released his spent form and took his sister,
pulling her away from her elderly parents. She looked no further than her
mother for help. The terrible wear grooving her once beautiful face she
earned anew in a heartbeat, her silence serving as perverse
acknowledgement of a fate long anticipated. She never made another sound.
With Tony on his bare, red backside, and his daughter held at the side of
the chamber, Adrian wasted no time and moved to the witch-wife, dropping
Finn’s head on the tiles behind his speckled heels. The thump of the skull

on the ceramic surface was far more sickening than the preceding sounds of
flint carving through a spinal column.
Adrian clamped a tanned hand over Jess Usher’s mouth to silence the
gruff baying of the elderly woman. ‘You’ve served us well, you old jackal.
What you brought here was marvellous. I can’t thank you enough. Though
that bit with the marrow? I know you’re one for tradition and for an
exactitude drawn from what you see, but I’ve always thought that detail
unnecessary.
‘You should have moved with the times. You never did and look at you
now, you old fool. You’ve not long left as it is. You can’t even walk. When
your legs went, your folk should have nested you in stone. That was when
the trouble began. You kept on going. On and on and on and now the
wheels have come off your chair, lass. The red has taken its toll. I know, I
know. We’ve all watched it happen and it’s been sad to see. But we’ve
another queen. All will be well under new management.
‘I promise you’ll be well cared for and placed in a good nest, deep in the
floor. Our descendents will honour your bones too, those that survive us.
Your remains are going deep too, where no one can dig ’em up. There will
be reverence, tradition, all the rites at your funeral. You have my word. We
know how it’s done.’
Adrian moved further behind Jessica Usher and cut her wizened throat,
scything his flint from beneath one shrivelled ear to the other. When her
tatty head flopped to the side of her shoulders and lolled, spilling warmth
from a new mouth beneath her jawbone, Adrian pointed his blade at Tony.
‘Old boy, you and Nanna are going to run. Not very far, I expect,
because the sides of my combe are steep. But over here the grove isn’t a
cave. We intend to make our provision of what must be given above the
ground. You brought it up this far, way too far, but we’ll take it from here
upon the red earth. There are other ways of managing them.’
He nodded toward the windows. ‘It’s incredible. You’ll get to experience
it first-hand too. We’ve a nice moon due and providing there’s no cloud, the
old Creel will fall upon you in sufficient light so that we can watch it
happen from up here. Personally, I cannot wait.
‘And even though you’ve fed the red like it’s a favourite hound, I don’t
expect you’ll be shown any favours. You’ve noticed how boisterous they’ve
become. That’s on you. All the other clans are in agreement. You’ve had
this coming, old boy, and we need to get those bitches back on a leash.’

Adrian paused to follow Tony’s horrified gaze: he wasn’t listening and
only had eyes for Jessica Usher’s carcass.
Adrian’s expression turned to disgust. ‘I don’t think she had long. What
do you think? Sooner or later Creel would have had the lot of you in that
shack and left you in bits. You brought them far, far too close. They should
never have left the grove. You overfed them. You must have been fucking
insane.’
‘You don’t understand,’ Tony gibbered. ‘You think we wanted to? You
don’t know what they demand –’
‘Yes, yes, Tony. But I want you to recognise this judgement as a kind of
penance for endangering the rest of us. We’ve been the poor cousins but
we’re absolutely pitiless when it comes to our survival. So out with the old,
aye? Has ever been thus.’
Adrian then took a moment to look down his front. His trousers and shirt
were wet through. ‘Darling,’ he said to his wife. ‘I need to change. We’ve
guests coming.’
Rising from her chair, Sheila nodded. She stepped off the dais, moving
carefully on shaking legs.

52
Helene's nose nuzzled Valda’s hair and inhaled the aroma of cherry
shampoo. Under it the fragrance of infancy was still strong, a scent unique
to small people.
Slumped across her lap, her daughter was concentrating on the cartoon
flashing on the television screen: a scene hectic with pink explosions,
glamorous fairies and what resembled toads.
Helene had watched the news headlines while Valda took her collection
of toy squirrels through complicated social routines, before changing the
channel so that Valda could watch a show before bedtime.
Valda stayed up until 8.30 now. An extra hour granted each night since
her mum had returned from Devon. And even when her daughter was
tucked in, Helene still sat beside her bed, or lay alongside her until she fell
asleep. Five months before, she’d come close to never being able to do that
again.
She anticipated no end to the bad dreams either. At night, Helene often
returned to Redstone before awaking with a jolt, her hair soaked.
Those nights, she’d always get out of bed to check on the small sleeping
figure next door because in most of these dreams she and Valda were in the
water. Black water beneath a lightless sky and no matter how hard Helene
swam towards the distressed cries of her daughter, towards glimpses of that
small, pale head that bobbed between the waves of night, she never reached
the girl, or even moved any closer. Instead, she’d drift further away.
In other dreams the two of them were chased by what might have been
large dogs, across the very land that she’d once wandered to find the place
where her brother had made recordings in a quarry. In those dreams, the big
muscular forms that she never saw clearly would laugh and chatter and
gabble along the valley floors. Valda’s little legs were never able to move
fast enough, so Helene would be forced to carry the child in her arms, while
her heart thumped fit to burst and her legs turned numb and clumsy.
Other nights, she’d dream of Lincoln. And she’d most often see him
before the pitch-black opening of a cave, or a tunnel, or a gap in some

rocks. Apertures all covered in long vines and purple flowers that made her
nervous.
Lincoln would smile and talk to her in these scenes about things she
could never recall on waking. But he’d chat innocently and she would
awake with a strong sense that he knew everything about her and Valda.
Sometimes he’d be a small boy, appearing as vividly as anyone can
appear in a dream, and he’d be wearing clothes that she’d long forgotten
he’d ever worn. The boy Lincoln would play a thin flute inside the mouth of
a cave and she would run to him, only to watch the small figure begin to cry
and reach for her hands as if she was his mother. But the boy was never able
to prevent his own slow progress backwards and into the dark where his
voice would fade. No matter how hard she begged him to stay with her, no
matter how hard she cried, he’d always walk backwards until his small
freckled face vanished from sight.
Helene felt grateful for any night, or afternoon nap, when she woke
without remembering her dreams. On waking, she was happiest if she
hadn’t dreamed at all.
She also swam more than ever before. She would not let her terror
swamp her when she looked at the clear blue water of the pool in the leisure
centre. She would force herself to get in and she would swim hard and only
stop once her shoulders burned and her breath grew ragged.
The others at the local self-help group she attended in Sutton Coldfield,
and the counsellor she was seeing for cognitive behavioural therapy, all
thought her swimming was a positive sign of managing her trauma.
Valda giggled. Something in her show had amused her. Her mother tried
to smile but her attention was mostly consumed by what she’d seen on the
evening news. And when was the farm and what existed below it, not in the
news?
Seven million pounds: that was the value the police had just revised and
affixed to the annual yield of the drug crop discovered in the four
underground plantations on Redstone Farm.
She had difficulty keeping track of how many councillors had resigned
from the Brickburgh council and in the neighbouring boroughs. But another
two had just gone from their positions in local government amidst the usual
allegations of payments of dirty money into their bank accounts, large sums
they were struggling to justify being earned from ‘consultancy work’.

Five police officers, including two senior officers and the Police and
Crime Commissioner for the county, had been suspended or had resigned
ahead of facing charges. A detective was being investigated for his
involvement in several murders and abductions.
Further down the food chain, a stream of electricians and builders,
assorted tradesmen, every employee at a food distribution centre, the
owners of four large yachts and even a headmaster had all been arrested. A
holiday camp and four new hotels were implicated and had been closed.
The investigation was in its fifth month. The harbour town and the
surrounding farmland had been turned over: every barn and boatshed
searched from Brickburgh to the banks of the Divilmouth Estuary. The man
Helene had briefly known as Phil, a crew member from the boat that had
ferried her out to sea, was found pretty soon after the police had ‘rescued’
her and Kat. She and Kat had been found wandering towards the
outbuildings of Redstone Farm, not long after Kat had discovered the first
underground plantation. Phil had since proved very useful to the police.
At Divilmouth police station she and Kat had been separated and Kat
was kept in custody for a long time, because of what she had done to the
man with the bad leg, the pig captain, who’d taken Helene out to the
channel in his new boat so that he could drown her.
That boat had been another asset purchased with illegal earnings and
was also being held as evidence in a police yard, in preparation for another
trial that she would have to attend as a witness.
Kat had also killed an elderly woman during that red and frantic time
that they’d both endured. A woman who Kat claimed had been one half of a
couple who’d kept her captive at her home: a mother and son whose real
names she’d never known. But though the woman’s identity had been
established, her body had still not been recovered. The woman’s son, a local
man implicated in the criminal organisation at Redstone Farm, remained in
a coma, brain-damaged from the injuries the journalist had inflicted upon
him.
The news channels no longer showed the picture of Lincoln, the
photograph, sourced from their mother, of him sitting in her garden, taken a
year before he’d disappeared. In the picture he had been smiling. Maybe
he’d just cracked one of his quips or jokes. Her mother couldn’t remember
exactly, but he’d dropped in for a few days after exploring some canals in
the centre of Birmingham, where he’d made recordings of echoes and other

noises. She had taken a picture because he’d grown a long reddish beard.
She’d thought he’d been the spitting image of her father.
That had been one of seventeen photographs shown of those who’d gone
missing, or whose apparent suicides in parts of the South West had been
called into question and were being reinvestigated, as far back as the 1980s.
Helene had only recognised the pictures of her brother and Steve, the
photographer.
Some remains of the missing had been found in the myriad tunnels and
caverns beneath the area referred to as Seven Quarries. Bone fragments and
teeth had been connected to six of the missing individuals, though what had
reduced the human remains to such a deplorable state had not been caught,
or seen, as the police and forensic investigation had continued below the red
earth of Redstone.
It was believed that the family at the head of the criminal organisation
had escaped shortly before the police had arrived at Redstone Farm, the
morning after Helene had swum for her life and for her daughter’s future to
reach the shore.
The very family that Kat had been looking for when Helene came across
her in the aftermath of the slaughter at the farm, the now notorious Willows
family, had comprised two elderly people and their middle-aged twin
children. Helene had briefly encountered the twins but not the parents.
None of them had ever been caught.
The father, Tony, had once been a famous musician, but Helene had
never heard of him before that interview she’d given the police in a hospital
bed in Divilmouth. Nor had she ever before seen the clips from The Old
Grey Whistle Test and the festivals. Broadcasters kept showing a
performance recorded in the Seventies of Tony Willows playing a mandolin
and another of him dressed as a Morris dancer at Knebworth. He didn’t look
at all capable of becoming the head of a vast, organised, ruthless criminal
gang and Helene understood why so many people for so long had found the
whole story difficult to accept.
The ‘attack dogs’ to which this family had fed their victims had
remained the greatest enigma. They had killed the first two police officers
on the scene and dismembered eight members of the strange, ghastly cult
that had served the drug empire. But the animals had never been found.
They’d either been destroyed and hidden or removed by the fleeing Willows

family. Like their owners, they’d remained at large. The police were
currently looking for the family in Spain and Portugal.
The journalist, Kat, whom she’d known so briefly, had remained in
hospital for a long time. After they’d been picked up outside the stillsmoking barn, Kat had remained under police protection while she’d helped
with their ‘inquiries’.
The charges against Kat had been dropped but there were many rumours
about her mental health and she’d been transferred to an institution
somewhere up north. She and Kat had not spoken since that afternoon at
Redstone Cross, where Helene had watched the woman – a lifestyle
journalist whom she’d struggled to recognise during their second and third
meetings – destroy a human being by hand with a sharpened rock.
Eventually, Helene turned her attention away from the latest news and
from her own grim memories. She checked the time.
‘Bedtime,’ she whispered, squeezing her daughter gently and drying her
moist eyes in the little girl’s hair.

53
The room reminded Kat of her room in her halls of residence at university:
a single bed, a laminate desk combined with a shelving unit, one chair, blue
carpet tiles as rough as a scouring pad, terrible curtains. She’d felt
comfortable and safe there.
Despite a growing desire to leave, swelling over the last month, her
mood was maudlin on the eve of her last night in the room. Her feelings
were strangely akin to the day she’d left university, over twenty years ago,
to start anew in the world without a job or much money in her bank
account.
Kat had since decided that anyone might benefit from time out in an
institution, now and again, to be sealed from what was hurting them out
there. The idea was no longer as crazy as it might have sounded to her five
months before. With the right medication, gallons of tea, much time spent
talking to people who listened and the space to actually think her life
through, her time at the hospital hadn’t been so bad. Time, distance, more
sleep than she’d ever had in her life and not giving a shit about her weight
for once had all been good medicine. All of it.
She placed her hand on the bed covers and smoothed then out. Her
tummy cramped from nerves and she wondered whether she should visit the
bathroom.
Reg and Delia would arrive the following morning: she imagined they’d
be prompt too, bang on ten. She imagined their faces whenever they saw the
hospital’s sign at the end of the drive, branded by the NHS Trust. What
came next would not be easy for them. They’d been kind.
With a smile, Kat imagined what Steve might have said about the
situation that she was about to enter, alone with his parents.
Well, you did kill two people, Kat. With a rock and a bloody rolling pin.
Mum’s bound to be a bit nervous about having you in the spare room. She’ll
avoid discussing specifics in any situation but will sleep with one eye open.
Trust me.

Kat looked at her bump, took her hands from the bed and stroked her
tummy, caressing their unborn child. A little miracle she often talked to.
Steve did too, in her head.
Through Delia and Reg’s desire to help her with this child, she’d
accepted how much they’d loved their son, unconditionally. And now she
was carrying their grandson, the sole factor in the entire debacle that
brought joy to any of them.
The forthcoming battles she imagined waging with Delia, a woman
who’d be unable to restrain her proprietary tendencies with the baby, Kat
vowed to manage with the same techniques she’d learned through her CBT
sessions at the hospital. Those skills would help her understand how she’d
feel whenever Delia crossed the line. Severe feelings of victimisation and
powerlessness still occasionally swamped her, but the aggressiveness that
grew from that distress she managed much better now. The red part of her,
that’s what she called it and that was how she would always refer to it.
She’d always had the red inside her, always. She’d even come to believe
that everyone did too. But she’d never imagined that it was limitless.
Kat would continue her therapy. She liked it. Delia had already sourced
a Mind group in North Devon, close to where she’d eventually be living.
She’d meet others in her situation, just like she’d done here: people who’d
suffered psychotic episodes and been the victims of the violent, of
predators.
Steve’s mum and dad had sold her cottage and found a new flat for her,
where she’d eventually live with her son. They’d also paved a smooth path
from the door of her room at the hospital to their holiday cottage in
Cornwall, where she’d spend her first few weeks outside, with them, before
going to her new home: her flat, west of the moors. It looked nice in the
pictures they’d shown her.
At times, Delia even held her hand now. She’d finally entered the inner
circle of Steve’s family. Steve would have appreciated that irony too.
Kat dabbed her eyes with the back of a knuckle.
With her books and computer all packed away and awaiting Reg’s
Range Rover in the morning, her thoughts returned to her first night at the
hospital, the last time the room had been so Spartan and empty.
Kat had been detained in the secure hospital for five months. Initially,
she’d been taken from the farm to Accident and Emergency in the big

hospital in Torbay, where they had a room for conducting psychiatric
assessments.
Her criteria had quickly been established as ‘high risk’ and she’d been
judged as someone suffering from a ‘severe psychotic episode’. Under the
Mental Health Act of 1983, she was deemed to have presented a ‘significant
danger’ to ‘others’ and to herself, because of the ‘profound degree of
violence and aggression’ that she’d displayed in her cottage and then at the
farm.
She’d told the doctors and nurses that it was just as well she had been
able to summon such a ‘profound degree of violence’, or she’d never have
been around to be assessed.
She’d consented to the treatment the doctors advised, both in A&E and
at this hospital, even though they hadn’t needed her consent. That’s how
bad a case she’d been in their eyes. And even after all she’d been through,
their judgement about her mental health still upset and shocked her. This
was how other people saw her now, including Reg and Delia, even though
they were careful to hide it.
The idea that she posed a ‘risk of harm’ to others shamed her more than
it hurt. But the diagnosis was not one that she found herself able to
convincingly argue against for long.
No physical restraint had been involved when they took her into care,
into the system: she was merely led to a secluded room beside A&E where
anti-psychotics were injected to reduce her agitation and the distress that
had consumed her outside the boundary of the farm.
Dry-mouthed,
restless
and
twitching,
then
drowsy
and
uncommunicative, often dizzy, constipated, she’d been brought to this
hospital and that’s where she’d stayed.
Her anti-psych medication was soon stopped because of the side-effects,
once it had been established that she was pregnant.
The worst of the side-effects passed within a few days after she was
clear of the medication but the taint of her ‘delusional disorder’ had meant
she’d needed to be kept in this room. The thoughts and hallucinations about
the farm’s barn that she’d persisted in sharing had guaranteed her
confinement. Her medical records hadn’t done her any favours either.
***

Last night.
Kat went and sat at her desk and recorded her feelings in her diary.
She’d done a lot of writing at the desk: enough to require massages to
ease her lower back pain. From what she’d gathered online and from
newspapers and magazines (which never stopped running features about the
Willows family, the murders and the drug farm), she’d already produced a
pretty good structure for the book she planned to write.
Her own story would form the narrative spine. The prologue she’d
already written and augmented with excerpts from her diary in a psychiatric
hospital. From that point, she’d take the reader all the way back to the press
conference in Plymouth, where the contents of the first cave were officially
shared with the world.
She had contacts in publishing and knew there would be significant
interest in her story; she’d even fantasised about a newspaper serialisation.
And she would include the story of what it was like to be a new mother
who’d barely escaped death several times, but who’d emerged a survivor
blessed with a child that she’d been told she was incapable of conceiving. A
miracle baby.
When she closed her diary, Kat checked the corridor outside her room.
All was quiet so she returned to her desk and opened her makeup bag.
She’d not worn cosmetics for months, not even when Sheila or Steve’s
parents had visited. But she’d go out there tomorrow with her face on.
She began applying her favourite red lipstick and her fingers trembled
enough to irritate her. As she applied the cosmetic to her mouth she also felt
a curious, reckless impulse to allow the slippery head of the stick to skirt
her mouth: to go out of bounds, to slide beyond her lips.
The colour of the lipstick must have excited her imagination because
when she closed her eyes, she acknowledged a now familiar idea that
another red face existed behind her own.
When Kat opened her eyes she wiped at the lipstick on her top lip to
produce a crimson streak at the side of her mouth. She smeared the
cosmetic further, across the pale skin of her cheek.
This made her whole face and scalp flush, her throat too. She felt hot all
over and absurdly guilty.
Her limbs loosened.
Restless, she leaned back and placed her hands upon her womb and
acknowledged what had been a rare and sudden episode of arousal. There’d

not been many of those inside this room. And again, so strangely and
unexpectedly, she’d also recognised a need to run. A compulsion born of a
body that seemed to have discovered a trapped source of energy. These
sensations were not unpleasant; they were the opposite.
Out of curiosity, Kat wiped a little more of the lipstick onto her
cheekbones, on both sides of her face. Then she leaned forward in her
cushioned seat and, using the pads of her fingertips, rubbed the cosmetic
into her skin with more purpose, circling the bones below her eyes: slowly,
sensually, applying a rouge with fingertips, reddening her pale skin.
When she sat back, the sight of her face in the mirror made her breath
catch.
Closing her eyes, she calmed herself and this time she didn’t repress the
images that appeared inside her mind. She let them form, let them grow.
And so clearly did that land, beneath the white sky, appear to her: a long
pale place, so open and so wild.


