ASOP'S FABL£S

Click here to jump to the Table of Contents

COpyBJCHT
© 1993 by Adobe Press, Adobe Systems Incorporated. All rights reserved.
The text of Aesop's Fables is public domain. Other text sections of this book
are copyrighted. Any reproduction of this electronic work beyond a personal
use level, or the display of this work for public or profit consumption or viewing, requires prior permission from the publisher.

This work isfurnished for informational useonly and should not be construed
as a commitment of any kind by Adobe Systems Incorporated. The moral or
eth cal opi n ions of th is work do not necessari ly reflect those of Adobe Systems
i

Incorporated. Adobe Systems Incorporated assumesno responsibilitiesforany

errorsor in accuracies that may appear in this work. The software and typefaces

mentioned on this page are furnished under license and may only be used in
accordance with the terms of such license.

Thiswork was electronically mastered using Adobe™ Acrobat™ software. The
original composition of this work was created using FrameMaker. Illustrations

were manipulated using Adobe Photoshop™. The display text isHerculanum.
Adobe, the Adobe Press logo, Adobe Acrobat, and Adobe Photoshop aretrade-

marksof Adobe Systems Incorporated which may be registered in certain jurisdictions.

CONTENTS
Copyright

H ow to use th s book
i

Introduction
List of fables by title

Aesop's Fables

Index of titles
Index of morals

How to create your own glossary and
question pages

How to print and make your own book
Fable questions

Click any line to jump to that section

4

HOW TO VSi THIS BOOK
This book contains several sections.
•

Click the Bookmarks and Page button in the tool bar to

display an electronic Table of Contents. Double-click the
small page icon to the left of a bookmark name to jump to

that page in the book.
•

List of Fables by Title lists the fables in the order in which

they appear in this book. Selecting any title will take you
to that fable. Select the title on the first page of the fable
to return to the List of Fables by Title.

^H€ FOX AND TH£ CP.O\^

continued

.

.

5

Index of Titles lists the fable titles alphabetically.
Selecting any title will take you to that fable. Click the Go
Back button in the tool bar to return to the Index of Titles.
•

Index of Morals lists the fable morals alphabetically.
Selecting any moral will take you to that fable. Select the
moral at the end of any fable to return to the Index
•

of Morals.

TH6 FOX XND TH6 CR.OW

continued

.

.

•

Fable Questions encourages you to answer and ask new

questions about each fable. Select any fable's question

mark to go to that fable's question page. To return to the
fable, select the arrow at the bottom of the question page.

THE FOX AND
TH6 CKOW

a
•

How to Create Your Own Glossary and Question Pages

tells you

how to add and replace questions and glossary

items.
•

How to Print and Make Your Own Book tells you how to

create your own paper book.

INTRODUCTION
"Tut, tut, child" said the Duchess.

"Everything's got a moral, if only you can find it."

—Lewis Carroll, A lice's Adventures in Wonderland

A fable is a very short story that tells us how to behave or
that teaches us a lesson. Usually, but not always, fables
are stories about animalsthat talk likepeople. Thelesson

that a fable teaches us is called a moral. It's not hard to
find themoralsinthefablesinthisbook. They are written
in italics (slanted letters) at the bottom of thefables.

Aesop is believed to have been a Greek slave who made

up these stories to make his life easier. Nobody is really
sure if Aesop made up these fables. What is certain,
however, is that the stories called Aesop's Fables are so

wonderful that they have been told over and over again
for thousands of years.

Many common sayings come from Aesop's Fables:
"Don't count your chickens before they hatch," and

"Honesty isthe best policy," and

"Look before you leap"
are fam

i

I

i

ar exam pi es.

Whether a Greek slave named Aesop made up these
stories or whether many people living at different times

made up the stories is not important. What's mportant is
i

that the stories have survived and are worth re-telling.

Adobe Systems is proud to present them in the newest
form of story-telling: the Acrobat electronic book.

9

LIST OF

FA8LB BY TITLE

The Wolf and the Lamb 14

The Frogs Desiring a King 30

The Dog and the Shadow 15

The Mountains in Labor 32

The Lion's Share 16

The Hares and the Frogs 33

The Wolf and the Crane 18

The Wolf and the Kid 34

The Man and the Serpent 20

The Woodman and
the Serpent 35

The Town Mouse and
the Country Mouse 21

The Bald Man and the Fly 36

The Fox and the Crow 23

The Fox and the Stork 37

The Sick Lion 24

The Fox and the Mask 39

The Ass and the Lapdog 25

Thejay and the Peacock 40

The Lion and the Mouse 27

The Frog and the Ox 41

The Swallow and the

Androcles and the Lion 43

Other Birds 29
continued

.

.

10

The Bat, the Birds,

The Ant and the

and the Beasts 45

Grasshopper 61

The Hart and the Hunter 47

The Tree and the Reed 63

The Serpent and the File 48

The Fox and the Cat 64

The Man and the Wood 49

The Wolf in Sheep's

The Dog and the Wolf 50
The Belly and the
Members 52
The Hart in the Ox-Stall 54
The Fox and the Grapes 55
The Horse, Hunter,
and Stag 56

The Peacock and Hera 58
The Fox and the Lion 59
The Lion and the Statue 60

Clothing 66

The Dog in the Manger 67
The Man and the
Wooden God 68
The Fisher 69
The Shepherd's Boy 70
The Young Thief and
His Mother 72

Th e M an an d His Two W ves 74
i

The Nurse and the Wolf 76
continued

.

.

I

li

The Tortoise and

The Laborer and the

the Birds 78

Nightingale 92

The Two Crabs 79

The Fox, the Rooster, and the
Dog 94

The Ass in the Lion's Skin 80
The Two Fellows and

The Wind and the Sun 96

the Bear 81

Hercules and the Wagoneer 97

The Two Pots 83

The Man, the Boy, and
the Donkey 98

The Four Oxen and
the Lion 84

The Miser and His Gold 100

The Fisher and the

The Fox and

Little Fish 85

the Mosquitoes 101

Avaricious and Envious 86

The Fox without a Tail 102

The Crow and the Pitcher 87

The One-Eyed Doe 104

The Man and the Satyr 89

Belling the Cat 105

The Goose with the

The Hare and the Tortoise 107

Golden Eggs 91
continued

.

.

12

The Old Man and
Death 109

The Hare with Many
Friends 110

The Lion in Love 112

The Cat-Maiden 122
The Horse and the Mule 123
The Trumpeter Taken
Prisoner 124

The Bundle of Sticks 114

The Buffoon and the
Countryman 125

The Lion, the Fox,

The Old Woman and the

and the Beasts 115

Wine-Jar 127

The Mule's Brains 117

The Fox and the Goat 128

The Eagle and the
Arrow 119

The Milkmaid and
Her Pail 120

13

ASOP'S FABL£S

14

THE WOLF AND TH6 LAMB
Once upon a time a Wolf was lapping at a spring on a
hillside when, looking up, what should heseebutaLamb
just beginning to drink a little lower down. "There's

supper," thought he, "if only

my

can find some excuse to

I

seize it." Then he called out to the Lamb, "How dare you

muddle the water from which

I

am drinking." "Nay,

master, nay," said Lambikin; "if the water be muddy up
there,

I

cannot be the cause of it, for it runs down from

you to me." "Wei then," said the Wolf, "why did you call
me bad n ames th s ti me ast year?" "Th at can n ot be, " sai d
I,

i

I

the Lamb; "I am only six months old." "I don't care,"
snarled the Wolf, "if it was not you it was your father";

and with that he rushed upon the poor little Lamb.

Any excuse will serve a tyrant.

15

THE DOC AND TH6 SHADOW
happened that a Dog had got a piece of meat and was
carrying it home in his mouth to eat it in peace. Now on
his way home he had to cross a plank lying across a running brook. As he crossed, he looked down and saw his
own shadow reflected in the water beneath. Thinking it
was another dog with another piece of meat, he made up
his mind to have that also. So he made a snap at the
shadow in the water, but as he opened his mouth the
piece of meat fell out, dropped into the water, and was
It

never seen again.

Beware lest you lose the substance
by grasping at the shadow.

16

THE LION'S 5HXP.6
TheLion once went hunting with theFox, the Jackal, and
the Wolf. They hunted and they hunted till at last they
surprised a Stag, and soon took its life. Then came the
question how the spoil should be divided. "Quarter me
this Stag," roared the Lion; so the other animals skinned

and cut it into four parts. Then the Lion took his stand
in front of the carcass and pronounced judgment: "The
it

me n my capacity as Ki ng of Beasts; the
second is mine as arbiter; another share comes to me for
my part in the chase; and as for the fourth quarter, well,

first quarter isfor

as for that,

I

i

should ike to see which of you will dare to
I

continued

.

.

17

lay a paw upon it." "Humph," grumbled the Fox as he

walked away with his tail between his legs; but he spoke
in a low growl:

You may share the labors of the great,
but you will not share the rewards.

18

THE WOLF AND TH6 CP.XN6
A Wolf had been gorging on an animal he had killed,
when suddenly a small bone in the meat stuck in his
throat and he could not swallow it. He soon felt terrible
pain in histhroat, and ran up and down groaning and
groaning and seeking for something to relieve the pain.
Hetried to induce every one he met to remove the bone.

would give anything," said he, "if you would take it
out." At last the Crane agreed to try, and told the Wolf to
Neon hisside and open hisjawsaswideashecould.Then
the Crane put its long neck down the Wolf's throat, and
"I

with its beak loosened the bone, till at last it got it out.
"Will you kindly give methe reward you promised?" said

the Crane. The Wolf grinned and showed histeeth and
continued

.

.

19
said: "Be content. You have put your head in side a Wolf's

mouth and taken it out again in safety; that ought to be
reward enough for you."

Gratitude and greed go not together

20

THE MAN AND THE 56P.P6NT
A Countryman's son by accident trod upon a Serpent's
tail,
i

which turned and bithimsothathedied.Thefather

n a rage got h s axe, an d pu rsu n g th e Serpen t, cut off part
i

i

of ts tai
i

I

.

So th e Serpent n reven ge began sti n gi n g several
i

of the Farmer's cattle and caused him severe loss. Well,

the Farmer thought it best to make it up with the Serpent,

and brought food and honey to the mouth of its lair, and
said to it: "Let's forget and forgive. Perhaps you were right

to punish my son, and take vengeance on my cattle, but
surely

I

was right in trying to revenge him. Now that we

are both satisfied why can't we be friends again?" "No,

no," said the Serpent, "takeaway your gifts. You can never
forget the death of your son, nor

I

the loss of my tail."

Injuries may be forgiven, but not
forgotten.

21

TH6 TOWN MOU56 XND
TH£ COUNTRY MOUSe
Now you must know that a Town Mouse once upon a
time went on a visit to hiscousin in thecountry. Hewas
rough and ready, this cousin, but heloved histown friend

and madehim heartily welcome. Bean sand bacon, cheese
and bread, were all he had to offer, but he offered them
freely. The

Town Mouse rather turned up his long nose at

this country fare, and said: "I cannot understand, Cousin,

how you can put up with such poor food as this, but of
course you cannot expect anything better in thecountry.

Comehomewith meandl'll show you how to live. When
you have been in town a week you will wonder how you
could ever have stood a country life." No sooner said than
done:thetwo mice set off for the town and arrived at the
continued

.

.

22

Town Mouse's residence late at night. "You will want
some refreshment after our long journey," said the polite
Town Mouse, and took hisfhend into thegrand dining
room. There they found the remain sofa fine feast, and

soon thetwo mice were eating up jellies and cakes and all
that was n ice. Suddenly they heard growl ng and barki ng.
i

"What isthat?" asked the Country Mouse. "It is only the
dogs of the house," answered the other. "Only!" said the

Country Mouse. "I do not

I

ike that music at

my dinner."

Just at that moment thedoorflew open, and in came two

huge dogs, and thetwo mice had to scamper down and
run off. "Good-bye, Cousin," said the Country Mouse.
"What! Going so soon?" asked the other. "Yes," he
replied. "Better beans and bacon in peace than cakes and
ale in fear."

Better beans and bacon in peace

than cakes and ale in fear.

23

THE FOX AND TH6 CR.OW
AFoxoncesawaCrowflyoff with a piece of cheese in its
beak and settle on a branch of a tree. "That's for me," said

the Fox, and he walked up to the foot of the tree. "Good
day, Mi stress Crow," hecried. "How well you are looking

today: how glossy your feathers; how bright your eyes.
feel

I

sure your voice must surpass that of other birds, just

as your figure does. Let me hear but one song from you

that

I

may greet you as the Queen of Birds." The Crow

lifted up her head and began to caw her best, but the

moment she opened her mouth the piece of cheese fell to
the ground, only to be snapped up by the Fox. "That will
do," said he. "That was all

cheese

I

I

wanted. In exchange for your

will give you a piece of advice for the future:

Do not trust flatterers.

24

THE SICK LION
A Lion had come to the end of hisdaysand lay sick unto
death at the mouth of his cave, gasping for breath. The
animals, hissubjects, came round him and drew nearer as

hegrew more and more helpless. When they saw him on
the point of death they thought to themselves: "Now is
the time to pay off old grudges." So the Boar came up and

drove at him with histusks. Then a Bull gored him with
his horns. Still the Lion lay helpless before them, so the
Ass, feeling quite safe from danger, came up, and turning
histail totheLion kicked uphisheelsintotheLion. "This
is a double death," growled the Lion.

Only cowards insult dying majesty.

25

THE ASS AND TH6 LXPDOC
A Farmer one day came to the stables to see to his beasts
of burden; among them was his favorite Ass. Along with

the Farmer came his Lapdog, who danced about and
licked his hand and frisked about as happy as could be.

The Farmer felt in his pocket, gave the Lapdog some
dainty food, and sat down while he gave his orders to his
sons. The Lapdog jumped into his master's lap and lay
th ere bl n ki n g wh e th e Farmer stroked h s ears. Th e Ass,
seeing this, broke loose from his halter and commenced
prancing about in imitation of the Lapdog. The Farmer
i

i

I

i

could not hold hissideswith laughter, so the Ass went up
to him, and putting his feet upon the Farmer's shoulder

continued

.

.

26

attempted to climb into hislap. The Farmer's son sru shed

up with sticks and pitchforksand soon taught the Ass that
clumsy jesting is no joke.

Clumsy jesting is no joke.

27

THE LION AND TH6 MOU56
Once, when a Lion was asleep, a little Mouse began running up and down upon him. Thissoon wakened the
Lion, who placed hishugepaw upon him, and opened his

big jaws to swallow him. "Pardon, O King," cried the little

Mouse, "forgive me this time,

I

shall never forget it!

I

may

be able to return the favor one of these day?" The Li on

was so tickled attheideaof the Mouse being able to help
him that he lifted up his paw and let him go. Sometime
after, the Lion was caught in a trap, and the hunters, who
desired to carry him alive to the King, tied him to a tree
whiletheywentin search of a wagon to carry him on. Just
then the ittle M ouse happened to pass by, and seeing the
I

continued

.

.

28

sad plight of the Lion, went up to him and soon gnawed

away the ropes that bound the King of the Beasts. "Was
not right?" said the little Mouse.
Little friends may prove great friends.

I

29

THE SWALLOW AND
TH£ OTH£P. BIPEDS
It

happened that a Countryman was sowing some hemp

seeds in afield where a Swallow and some other birds were

hopping about picking up their food. "Beware of that
man," observed the Swallow. "Why, what is he doing?"
asked the others. "That is hemp seed he is sowing; be careful to pick up every oneoftheseeds, or else you will repent

The birds paid no heed to the Swallow's words, and by
and by the hemp grew up and was made nto cord, and of
the cords nets were made, and many a bird that had
ignored the Swallow's advice was caught in nets made out
of that very hemp. "What did tell you?" said the Swallow.
it."

i

I

Destroy the seed of evil,
or it will grow up to be your ruin.

30

THE fKOQS D6SIWNC X KJNC
The Frogs were living as happy as could be in a marshy
swamp that just suited them. They went splashing about,
caring for nobody and nobody troubled them. But some
of the frogs thought that this was not right, that they

should havea king and a proper constitution, so they sent

up a petition to Zeus to give them what they wanted.
"Mighty Zeus," they cried, "send unto us a king that will
rule over us and keep us in order." Zeus laughed at their
croaki ng and threw down nto theswamp a huge Log. The
Frogs were frightened out of their lives by thecommotion
i

made in their midst, and all rushed to the bank to look at
the horrible monster. But after a time, seeing that it did
not move, one or two of the boldest of them ventured out

towardsthe Log, and even dared to touch it. Still it did not
continued

.

.

31

move. Then the greatest hero of the Frogs jumped upon
the Log and commenced dancing up and down upon it;

thereupon all the Frogs came and did the same, and for

some ti me the Frogs went about thei r busi n ess every day
without taking the slightest notice of their new King Log
lying in their midst. But this did not suit them, so they

sent another petition to Zeus, and said to him, "We want

a real king; one that will really rule over us." Now this

made Zeus angry, so hesentthem a big Stork that soon set
to work gobbl ng them al up. Then the Frogs repented,
i

I

but it was too late.
Better no rule than cruel rule.

32

THE MOUNTAINS IN LABOR.
One day the Countryfolk noticed that the Mountains
werein labor; smokecameout of their summits, the earth

was q u aki n g at th ei r feet, trees were crash n g, an d h uge
rocks were tumbling. They felt sure that something horriblewasgoingto happen. They all gathered together in
one place to see what terrible thing this could be. They
i

waited and they waited, but nothing came. At last there

was a still more violent earthquake and a huge gap
appeared in thesideoftheMountains. They all fell down
upon their knees and waited. At long last, a teeny, tiny
mouse poked its little head and bristles out of the gap and

came running down towards them, and ever after they
used to say: "Much outcry, little outcome."

Much outcry, little outcome.

33

THE HXK65 XND THE FKOQS
Th e H ares were so persecuted by th e oth er beasts th ey d d
not know whereto go. As soon asthey saw a si ngleanimal
i

approach them, off they used to run. One day they saw a
troop of wild Horses stampeding about, and in quite a
panic all the Hares scuttled off to a nearby lake, deter-

mined to drown themselves rather than live in such a
continual state of fear. But just as they got near the bank
of the lake, a troop of Frogs, frightened in their turn by

the approach of the Hares, scuttled off, and jumped into
the water. "Truly," said one of the Hares, "things are not
so bad asthey seem: there is always someone worse off

than yourself."

There is always someone worse off than
yourself.

34

THE WOLF AND TH6 KID
A Kid was perched on the top of a house, and looking
down saw a Wolf passing under him. Immediately he
began to revile and attack his enemy. "Murderer and
thief," hecried, "why are you here near honest folks'

houses? How dare you make an appearance where your
vile deeds are known!" "Curse away,

my young friend,"

said the Wolf. "It iseasy to be brave from a safe distance.
It is easy to be brave from

distance.

a safe

35

THE WOODMAN AND
TH£ S6KP6NT
Onewintry day a Woodman wastrampinghomefrom his
work when he saw something black lying on the snow.
When he came closer he saw it was a Serpent, apparently
dead. But hetook it up and put it in hisjacketto warm
while he hurried home. As soon as he got indoors he put
the Serpent down on the hearth before the fire. The children watched it and saw it slowly come to life again. Then
one of them stooped down to stroke it, but the Serpent
raised itshead and put out itsfangsand was about to sting
the child to death. So the Woodman seized his axe and
with one stroke cut the Serpent in two. "Ah," said he, "no
gratitude from the wicked."

No gratitude from the wicked.

36

THE BALD MAN AND
THE FLY
There once was a Bald Man who sat down after work on a
hot summer's day. A Fly came up and kept buzzi ng about
his bald pate, stinging him from time to time. The Man

aimedablowathislittleenemy, but his palm came on his
head instead; and again the Fly tormented him. But this

time the Man was wiser, and said: "You will only injure
yourself if you take notice of despicable enemies."

You will only injure yourself if you take
notice of despicable enemies.

37

THE FOX AND TH6 STOKK
At one time the Fox and the Stork were on visiting terms

and seemed very good friends. So the Fox invited the
Stork to dinner, and for a joke put nothi ng before her but

some soup in a very shallow dish. This the Fox could easily lap up, but theStork could only wet theend of her long

and left the meal as hungry as when she began.
"I am sorry," said the Fox, "thesoup is not to your iking."
"Pray do not apologize," said theStork. "I hope you will
return this visit, and come and dinewith me soon." So a
bill

in

it,

I

day was appoi nted when the Fox should visit the Stork;
but when they were seated at thetabletheir dinner was

contained in a very long-necked jar with anarrow mouth,
in which the Fox could not insert hissnout. All

hecould

continued

.

.

38

manage to do was to lick the outside of the jar. "I will not
apologizeforthedinner,"saidtheStork"becauseonebad
turn deserves another."

One bad turn deserves another.

39

THE FOX AND TH6 MASK
A Fox had by some means got nto the storeroom of a
i

theatre. Suddenly heobservedafaceglaringdown on him

and became very frightened; but looking more closely he
found it was only a Mask, such as the type actors use to
put over their face. "Ah," said the Fox, "you look very fine.
It's a pity

you haven't got any brains."

Outside show is a poor substitute for
inner worth.

40

THE JXY AND TH6 P6ACOCK
A Jay ventured into a yard where Peacocks used to walk
and found there a number of feathers which had fallen
from the Peacocks when they were moulting. Hetied

them to his tail and strutted down towards the Peacocks.
As the J ay approached, the Peacocks discovered the disguise and pecked at the J ay and plucked away his borrowed plumes. So when the J ay went back to the other
Jays, who had watched his behavior from a distance, they

were equally annoyed with him and told him: "It is not

on ly fine feathers that make fine bi rds."
It is not only fine feathers that

fine birds.

make

41

THE FKOq XND THE OX
"Oh Father," said a little Frog to the big one sitting by the
side of a pool, "I have seen such a terrible monster! It was
as big as a mountain, with horns on its head, and along
tail,

and it had hoofsdivided in two." "Tush, child, tush,"

said the old Frog, "that was only Farmer White's Ox. It
isn't so bigeither;

hemay be a little bit taller than

I,

but

I

could easily make myself quite as broad; just you see." So

heblew himself out, and blew himself out, and blew himself out. "Was he as big as that?" asked he. "Oh, much bigger than that," said the young Frog. Again the old one
blew himself out, and asked the young one if the Ox was
as big as that. "Bigger, father, bigger," was the reply. So
the Frog took a deep breath, and blew and blew and blew,
continued

.

.

42

and swelled and swelled and swelled. And then he said:
"I'm sure the Ox is not as big as..." but at that very

moment he burst.
Self-conceit may lead to selfdestruction.

43

ANDR.0CL6S AND TH6 LION
A slave named And rod es once escaped from his master
and fled to theforest. As he was wanderi ng about there he

came upon a Lion lying down moaning and groaning. At
he turned to flee, but finding that the Lion did not
pursue him, he turned back and went up to him. Ashe
came near, the Lion put out his paw, which was all swollen and bleeding, and Androdes found that a huge thorn
had got into it and was causing all thepain. Hepulledout
the thorn and bound up the paw of the Lion, who was
soon ableto rise and lickthehandof Androdes ike a dog.
Then the Lion took Androdes to his cave, and every day
used to bring him meat from which to live. But shortly
afterwards both Androdes and the Lion were captured,
and the slave was sentenced to be thrown to the Lion,
first

I

continued

.

.

44
after the latter had been kept without food for several

days. The Emperor and all his Court came to see the spectacle, and

And rod es was led out into the middle of the

arena. Soon the Lion was let loose from his den, and

rushed bounding and roaring towards his victim. But as

soon as h e came n ear to And rod es he recognized his
friend, and fawned upon him, and licked his hands likea

friendly dog. The Emperor, surprised at this, summoned

Androdesto him, who told him the whole story. Whereupon the slave was pardoned and freed, and the Lion let
loose to his native forest.

Gratitude is the sign of noble souls.

45

THE BAT, THE B1KDS, XND
TH£ B6MTS
A great battle was about to happen between the Bi rds and
the Beasts. When the two armies were collected together
the Bat hesitated about which to join. The Birds that
passed his perch said: "Come with us"; but he said: "I am
a Beast." Later on, some Beasts who were passing under-

neath him looked up and said: "Come with us"; but he
said: "I

am a Bird." Luckily at the last moment peace was

made, and no battle took place, so the Bat came to the
Birds and wished to join in the rejoicings, but they all

turned against him, and he had to fly away. Hethen went
to the Beasts, but soon had to retreat, or else they would

continued

.

.

46

have torn him to pieces. "Ah," said the Bat, "I see now.
"'Hethat is neither onething nor the other has no
friends.'"

He that is neither one thing nor the
other has no friends.

47

THE HAM AND THE HUNT6K
The Hart was once drinking from a pool and admiring the
noblefigurehemadethere. "Ah," said he, "wherecan you
see such noble horns as these, with such antlers! But

wish

I

I

had legs more worthy to bear such a noble crown.

and slight." At that
moment a Hunter approached and sent an arrow whistling after him. Away bounded the Hart, and soon, by the
aid of his nimble legs, was nearly out of sight of the
Hunter. But not noticing where he was going, the Hart
passed under some trees with branches growing low in
It's a pity these legs are so slim

which his antlers got caught so that the Hunter had time
to catch up. "Alas! alas!" cried the entangled Hart. "We
often despise what is most useful to us."
1/1/

e often despise what is most
useful to us.

48

THE S6KP6NT AND TH6 FILE
A Serpent in the course of its wanderings came into an
armorer's shop. Asheglided over the floor he felt hisskin
pricked by a file lying there. In a rage he turned upon it

and tried to dart hisfangs into it, but hecould do no harm
to the heavy iron and had soon to give over his wrath.
It is useless attacking the insensible.

49

THE MAN AND TH6 WOOD
AMan cameintoaWoodoneday with an axein hishand
and begged all theTreesto give him a small branch,

which he wanted for a particular purpose. TheTrees were
good-natured and gave him one of their branches. What
did the Man do but put it into an axe head, and soon set
to work cutting down tree after tree. Then the Trees saw

how foolish they had been in giving their enemy the
means of destroying themselves.
Beware what you give to future
enemies.

50

TH6 DOC XND TH6 WOLF
A gaunt Wolf was almost dead with hunger when he happened to meet a House-dog who was passing by. "Ah,
Cousin," said the Dog. "I knew your irregular life will

soon be the ruin of you. Why do you not work steadily as

do I, and get your food regularly given to you?" "I would
have no objection," said the Wolf, "if could only get a
I

chance." "I will easily arrange that for you," saidtheDog.

"Come with me to my master and you shall share my
work." So the Wolf and the Dog went towards the town
together. On the way there the Wolf noticed that the hair

on a certai n part of the Dog's neck was very much worn
away, so he asked him how that had come about. "Oh, it
is nothing," saidtheDog.

"That isonly the place where
continued

.

.

51

the collar is put on at night to keep me chained up; it
chafesabit, butonesoon gets used to it." "Isthat all?'
said the Wolf. "Then good- bye to you, Master Dog."

Better starve free than be a fat slave.

52

THE B6LLY XND THE

MEMBERS
Onefine day it occurred to the M embers of the Body that
they were doi ng al the work and the Bel ly was havi ng al
the food. So they held a meeting, and after a long discussion, decided to stri ke work ti the Bel y consented to take
its proper share of the work. So for a day or two, the Hands
I

I

1

1

I

refused to take the food, the M outh refused to receive it,

and the Teeth had no work to do. But after a day or two
the M embers began to find that they themselves were not
in a very active condition: the Hands could hardly move,

and the Mouth was all parched and dry, whiletheLegs
were unable to support the rest. So thus they found that
continued

.

.

53

even the Belly in its dull quiet way was doing necessary

work for the Body, and that all must work together or the
Body will goto pieces.
All must work together.

54

THE HAM IN TH6 OX-STALL
A Hart hotly pursued by a H unter's houndsfled for refuge
into an ox-stall, and buried itself in a large bale of hay,

leaving nothing to be seen but the tips of its horns. Soon
after the Hunter came and asked if any one had seen the

Hart. The stable boys, who had been resting after their

dinner, looked round, but could see nothing, and the

H unters went away. Shortly afterwards the M aster came
in, and looking round, saw that something unusual

had

taken place. He pointed to the hay and said: "What are

those two curious things sticking out of the hay?"

And when the stable boys went to look they discovered
the Hart.

Nothing escapes the master's eye.

55

THE FOX AND TH6 CRAPES
One hot summer's day a Fox was strolling through an
orchard till hecametoabunch of Grapesjust ripening on
a vine which had been trained over a lofty branch. "Just

thething to quench my thirst," said the Fox. Drawing
back a few paces, hetookarun and a jump, but just
missed thebunch. Turning round again with aOne,Two,
Three, he jumped up, but with no greater success. Again

and again hetried after the tempting morsel, but at last
had to give it up. As the Fox walked away with hisnosein
the air, he said: "I am sure they are sour."
It is easy to despise what

you cannot get.

56

THE H0KS6, HUNiei^,
XND STKQ
A quarrel had arisen between the Horse and the Stag, so
the Horse came to a H unter to ask his hel p to take revenge

on the Stag. The Hunter agreed, but said: "If you desire to
conquer the Stag, you must permit me to guide you with
these reins, and allow this saddle to be placed upon your

may keep steady upon you as wefol low after
the enemy." The Horse agreed to the conditions, and the
back so that

I

Hunter soon saddled and bridled him. With theaid of the
Hunter the Horse soon overcame the Stag, and said to the
Hunter: "Now, get off and remove those things from my
continued

.

.

57

mouth and back." "Not so fast, friend," said the Hunter.

"Now that I've got you under bit and spur

I

prefer to keep

you that way."
If you allow people to use you

for your own purposes, they will use

you for theirs.

58

THE P6AC0CK AND H6KA
A Peacock once placed a petition before Hera desiring to
have the voice of a nightingale in addition to hisother
attractions; but Hera refused his request.

When he per-

sisted and pointed out that he was her favorite bird, she
said: "Be content with your lot.

One cannot be first in

everything."

One cannot be first in everything.

59

THE FOX AND TH6 LION
When the Fox first saw the Li on he was terribly frightened
and ran away and hid himself in the woods. Next time
however, when the Fox came near the King of Beasts, he
stopped at a safe distance and watched him pass by. The
th rd ti
i

me they came near one another the Fox went

straight up to the Lion and passed the time of day with

him, askingtheLion howhisfamily was faring and when

he might have the pleasure of seeing him again. Then,
turning histail, the Fox parted from the Lion without

much ceremony.
Familiarity breeds contempt.

60

THE LION XND TH6 STXTU6
A Man and a Lion were discussing the relative strength of
men an d on s n gen eral Th e M an conten ded th at h e an
I

i

.

i

his fellows were stronger than lions by reason of their
greater intelligence. "Come now with me," hecried, "and
I

will soon prove that

I

am right." Sohetookhim into the

public gardens and showed him a statue of Hercu es overI

coming the Lion and tearing his mouth in two. "That is
all

very well," said the Lion, "but proves nothing, for it

was a man who made the statue."

We can easily represent things
as we wish them to be.

61

THE ANT AND
THE CKASSHOPP£K
One summer's day a Grasshopper was hopping about,
chi rpi ng and si ngi ng to its heart's content. An Ant passed
by, bearing along with great toil an ear of corn he was tak-

ing to the nest. "Why not come and chat with me," said

the Grasshopper, "instead of toiling and working in that

way?" "I am helping to lay up food for the winter," said
the Ant, "and recommend you to do the same." "Why
bother about winter?" asked the Grasshopper. "We've got
plenty of food at present." But the Ant went on its way

and continued its toil. When the winter came the Grasshopper had no food and found itself dying of hunger
continued

.

.

62

wh le it saw the ants distri buti ng corn and grai n from the
i

stores they had collected in the summer. Then the Grass-

hopper knew:
It is best to prepare for the days of

necessity.

63

TH6 TR.66 AND TH€ ReeD
"Well, little one," said a Tree to a Reed that was growing
at its foot, "why do you not plant your feet deeply in the

ground, and raise your head boldly in the air as do I?" "I

am contented with my lot," said the Reed. "I may not be
so grand, but think am safer." "Safe!" sneered theTree.
"Who shall pluck me up by the roots or bow my head to
I

I

the ground?" But it soon had to repent of its boasting, for
a hurricane arose which tore it up from its roots and cast
it

a useless log on the ground, whilethe little Reed, bend-

ing to the force of the wind, soon stood upright again

when the storm had passed over.
Obscurity often brings safety.

64

THE FOX AND TH6 CAT
A Fox was boasti ng to a Cat of its clever devices for escaping its enemies. "I have a whole bag of tricks," the Fox
said, "which contains a hundred ways of escaping

enemies." "I have only one," said the Cat, "but

I

my

can gen-

erally manage with that." At that very moment they

heard the cry of a pack of hounds comi ng towards them,

and the Cat immediately scampered upatreeand hid herself in the boughs. "This is

my plan," said theCat. "What

are you going to do?" The Fox thought first of one way,

then of another, and while he was debating the hounds

came nearer and nearer, and at last the Fox in his confusion was caught up by the hounds and soon killed by the
continued

.

.

65

huntsmen. The Cat, who had been looking on, said:
"Better one safe way than a hundred on which you can-

not reckon."
Better one safe way than a hundred

on which you cannot reckon.

66

THE WOLF IN SH66P'5
CLOTHINC
A Wolf found great difficulty in getting at the sheep
owingto the vigilance of the shepherd and hisdogs. But
one day it found the skin of a sheep that had been flayed
and thrown aside, so it put it on over its own pelt and
strolled down among the sheep. The Lamb that belonged

to the sheep, whose skin the Wolf was wearing, began to

follow the Wolf in the Sheep's clothing; so, leadingthe

Lamb a little apart, he soon made a meal of her, and for
some time after he succeeded in deceiving the sheep, and
enjoying hearty meals.

Appearances are deceptive.

67

THE DOC IN TH6 MANC6K
A Dog looking out for its afternoon nap jumped into the
M anger of an Ox and lay there cozily upon the straw.
But soon the Ox, returning from its afternoon work, came

up to the M anger and wanted to eat some of the straw.
The Dog in a rage, being awakened from its si umber,
stood up and barked at the Ox, and whenever it came near
attempted to bite it. At last the Ox had to give up the
hope of getti ng at the straw and went away mutteri ng:
"Ah, people often grudge others what they cannot enjoy
themselves."

People often grudge others

what they cannot enjoy themselves.

68

THE MAN AND
THE WOODEN COD
In the old daysmen used to worship stones and idols, and

prayed to them to give them luck. It happened that a Man

had often prayed to a wooden idol he had received from
hisfather, but hisluck never seemed to change. Heprayed

and he prayed, but still he remained as unlucky as ever.

One day in the greatest rage he went to the Wooden God
and with one blow swept it down from its pedestal. The
idol broke in two, and what did hesee?An immense num-

ber of coins flying all over the place.

[Create your own moral.]

69

THE FI5H6R.
A Fisher once took his bagpipes to the bank of a river and
played upon them with the hope of making the fish rise,

but not one fish put its nose out of the water. So he cast
his net into the river and soon drew it forth filled with
fish. Then

hetook his bagpipes again, and, as he played,
the caught fish leapt up in the net. "Ah, you dance now
when play," said he. "Yes," said an old Fish: "When you
are in a person's power you must do as they bid."
I

W hen you are in a person's power
you must do as they bid.

70

THE SHEPHERD'S BOY
There was once a young Shepherd Boy who tended his
sheep at the foot of a mountain near a dark forest. It was
rather lonely for him all day, so hethought upon a plan

by which he could get a little company and some excitement. He rushed down towards the village calling out
"Wolf, Wolf," and the villagers came out to meet him,

and some of them stopped with him for a considerable
time. This pleased the boy so much that a few days after-

wards h e tri ed th e same tri ck, an d agai n th e vi agers came
1

1

tohishelp. But shortly after thisa Wolf actually did come

out from theforest, and began to worry the sheep, and the

boy of course cried out "Wolf, Wolf," still louder than
before. But this time the villagers, who had been fooled
twice before, thought the boy was again deceiving them,
continued

.

.

71

and nobody stirred to cometo his help. So the Wolf made
a good meal off the boy's flock, and when the boy complained, the wise man of the village said: "A liar will not

be believed, even when he speaks the truth."

A liar will not be believed,
even when he speaks the truth.

72

TH6V0UNC THI6F AND

MOTHER

HIS

A young Man had been caught in a daring act of theft and
had been condemned to be executed for it. He expressed
his desire to see his Mother and to speak with her before

he was led to execution, and of course this was granted.
When hisMothercametohimhesaid:"l wantto whisper
to you," and when she brought her ear near him, he
nearly bit it off. All the bystanders were horrified and
asked him what hecould mean by such brutal and inhuman conduct. "It isto punish her," he said. "When was
young began with stealing littlethings, and brought
them hometo Mother. Instead of rebukingand punishing
me, she laughed and said: 'It will not be noticed.' It is
I

I

continued

.

.

73

because of her that

I

am here today." "He is right,

woman," said the Priest. "Train up a child in the way
heshould go, and when heisold he will not depart
therefrom."

Teach a child well.

74

THE MAN AND HIS TWO
wives
In theold days, when men were allowed to have many

wives, a middle-aged Man had one wife that was old and

one that was young; each loved him very much, and
desired to see him like herself. Now the Man's hair was
turning grey, which the young Wife did not like, as it
made him look too old for her husband. So every night
sheused to comb hishairand pick out thewhiteones. But
the elder Wife saw her husband growing grey with great
pleasure, for she did not ike to be mistaken for his
I

continued

.

.

75

mother. So every morning she used to arrange his hair

and pick out as many of the black ones as she could.

The con sequence was the Man soon found himself
entirely bald.

Yield to all and you will soon

have nothing to yield.

76

THE KJUKS6 XND THE WOLF
"Bequietnow/'saidan old Nursetoachildsittingon her
will throw you to the
lap. "If you make that noise again
I

Wolf." Now it chanced that a Wolf was passing close

under the window as this was said. So he crouched down
by the side of the house and waited. "I am in good luck
today," thought he. "It issureto cry soon, and a daintier

morsel

I

haven't had for many a long day." So he waited,

and he waited, and he waited, till at last the child began
to cry, and the Wolf came forward before the window and

looked up to the Nurse, wagging histai I. But all the Nurse
did was to shut down the window and call for help, and
continued

.

.

77

the dogs of the house came rushing out. "Ah," said the

Wolf as he galloped away "Enemies' promises were made
to be broken."

Enemies' promises were made to be
broken.

78

THE TOK.TOI56 AND
TH£ BIKDS
A Tortoise desired to change its place of residence, so he
asked an Eagleto carry him to his new home, promising

her a rich reward for her trouble. The Eagle agreed, and
seizing the Tortoise by the shell with her talons, soared
aloft.

On their way they met a Crow, who said to the

Eagle: "Tortoise is good eating." "Theshell istoo hard,"

said the Eagle in reply. "Those rocks would crack the
shell," was the Crow's answer; and the Eagle, taking the

hint, let fall theTortoiseon a sharp rock, and thetwo

birds made a hearty meal of the Tortoise.

Never soar aloft on an enemy's wings.

79

THE TWO CP.XB5
One

fi

n e day two C rabs came out from th ei r h ome to take

a stroll on the sand. "Child," said the mother, "you are

walking ungracefully. You should accustom yourself to
walking straight forward without twisting from side to
side." "Pray, mother," said theyoung one, "do but set the

exam pie yourself, and

I

will follow you."

Example is the best precept.

80

THE ASS IN THE LION'S SKIN
An Ass once found aLion'sskin which the hunters had
left out in the sun to dry. He put it on and went towards
his native village. All fled at his approach, both men and
animals, and he was proud that day. In hisdelight he
lifted up his voice and brayed, but then everyone

knew

him, and his owner came up and gave him a sound cudgelingforthefright hehad caused. And shortly afterwards
a Fox came up to him and said: "Ah,

I

knew you by your

voice."

Fine clothes may disguise,
but silly words will disclose a fool.

81

THE TWO FELLOWS XND
THE StXK
Two Fel lows were travel ng together th rough a wood,
when a Bear rushed out upon them. One of the travelers
i

happened to be in front, and heseized hold of the branch
of a tree, and hid himself among the leaves. The other
threw himself flat down upon theground, with hisfacein
the dust. The Bear, coming up to him, put his muzzle
close to hisear, and sniffed and sniffed. But at last with a

growl he shook his head and slouched off, for bears will

not touch dead meat. Then the fel low in the tree came

down to his comrade, and, laughing, said "What was it
continued

.

.

82

that Master Bear whispered to you?" "He told me,"
said the other, "never trust a friend who deserts you at

a pinch."

Never trust a friend
who deserts you at a pinch.

83

THE TWO POTS
Two Pots had been left on the bank of a river, oneof brass,
and oneof earthenware. When the tide rose they both
floated off down the stream. Now the earthenware pot
tried its best to keep aloof from the brass one, which cried

out: "Fear nothing, friend,

I

will

not strike you." "But

I

may comein contact with you," said the earth en ware pot.
"Whether

I

hit you, or you hit me,

I

shall suffer for it."

The strong and the weak
cannot keep company.

84

THE FOUR. OX6N XND
THE LION
A Lion used to prowl about a field in which four Oxen
used to dwell. Many a time he tried to attack them, but

whenever he came near they turned their tails to one
another so that whichever way he approached them he
was met by the horns of one of them. At last, however,
they began quarreling among themselves, and each went
off to pasture alone in a separate corner of thefield. Then
the Lion attacked them one by one and soon made an end
of all four.

United we stand, divided we fall.

85

TH6 FISH6K AND
TH6 LITTL6 FISH
It

happened that a Fisher, after fishing all day, caught

only a little Fish. "Pray, let mego, master," said the Fish.
"1

am much too small for your eating just now. If you put

me back into the river

1

shall soon grow, then you can

make a fine meal of me." "Nay, nay, my little Fish,"
said the Fisher. "1 have you now. may not catch you
1

hereafter."

A little thing in hand is worth more
than a great thing in prospect.

9

86

AVARJ CIO VS AND ENVIOUS
Two neighbors came before Zeus and prayed him to grant
their hearts' desire. Now the one was full of avarice, and

the other eaten up with envy. So to punish them both,

Zeus granted that each might have whatever he wished
for himself, but only on condition that the other had

twice as much. The Avaricious neighbor prayed to have a

room full of gold. No sooner said than done; but all his
joy was turned to grief when he found that his envious
neighbor had two rooms full of the precious metal. Then
came the turn of the Envious neighbor who could not
bear to think that his neighbor had any joy at all. So he
prayed th at hisAvaricious neighbor might have one of his
own eyes put out, by which means he himself became
totally blind.

Vices are their own punishment.

87

THE CR.OW XND THE
PITCH6K
A Crow, half-dead with thirst, came upon a Pitcher which
had once been full of water, but when the Crow put its
beak into the mouth of the Pitcher he found that only
very little water was eft and that he could not reach far
I

enough down to get at it. Hetried, and hetried, but at last
had to give up in despair. Then a thought came to him,
and he took a pebble and dropped it into the Pitcher.
Then he took another pebble and dropped it into the
Pitcher. Then he took another pebble and dropped that
into the Pitcher. Then he took another pebble and
dropped that into the Pitcher. Then he took another pebble and dropped that into the Pitcher. At last, at last, he
continued

.

.

88

saw the water mount up near him, and after casting in a
few more pebbles he was able to quench histhirstand
save his life.
Little by little does the trick.

89

THE MAN AND TH6 SATYK
A Man had lost his way in a wood one bitter winter's
night. As he was roaming about, a Satyr came up to him,

and finding that he had lost his way, promised to give

him a lodging for the night and guide him out of theforest in the morning. As he went along to the Satyr's cell,
the Man raised both his hands to his mouth and kept on
blowing at them. "What do you do that for?" said the
Satyr. "My hands are numb with the cold," said the Man,
"and my breath warms them." After this they arrived at
the Satyr's home, and soon the Satyr put a smoking dish
of porridge before him. But when the Man raised his
spoon to his mouth hebegan blowing upon it. "And what
do you do that for?" said the Satyr. "The porridge is too
continued

.

.

90

hot, and

my breath will cool it." "Out you go," said the

Satyr. "I will

have nothing to do with a man who can

blow hot and cold with the same breath."
[Create your own moral.]

91

THE C00S6 WITH TH6

C0LD6N eCCS
One day a countryman going to the nest of his Goose
found there an egg all yellow and glittering. When he
picked it up it was as heavy as lead and he was going to

throw it away because hethought a trick had been played

upon him. But hetook it home on second thought, and
soon found to his delight that it was an egg of pure gold.
Every morning the same thing occurred, and he soon
became rich by selling his eggs. As he grew rich he grew
greedy; and thinking to get at once all the gold the
Goose could give, he killed it and opened it, only to find
nothing.

Greed often overreaches itself.

92

THE LABORS AND
THE KIICHTI1MCAU
ALaborerlaylisteningtoaNightingale'ssongthroughout
the summer night. So pi eased was he with it that the next
night hesetatrap for it and captured it. "Now that

I

have

caught thee," hecried, "thou shalt always sing to me."

"We Nightingales never sing in a cage," said the bird.
"Then I'll eat thee," said the Laborer. "I have always heard
that a nightingale on toast isa dainty morsel." "Nay, kill

menot/'saidtheNightingale, "but let mefree, and I'll tell
thee three things far better worth than my poor body."

The Laborer let him loose, and the N ightingaleflew up to
a branch of a tree and said: "Never believe a captive's
continued

.

.

93

promise; that's one thing. Then again: Keep what you
have. And third piece of advice is: Sorrow not over what
is lost forever."

Then the songbird flew away.

Sorrow not over what is lost forever.

94

THE FOX, TH6 R005T6K,
XND TH6 DOC
One moonlit night a Fox was prowling about a farmer's
hen-coop and saw a Rooster roosting high up beyond his
reach. "Good news, good news!" he cried. "Why, what is
it?" asked the Rooster. "King Lion hasdeclared a universal

truce. No beast may hurt another henceforth, but all shall

dwell together in brotherly friendship." "Why, that is

good news," said the Rooster, "and see someone coming
I

with whom wecan share thegood tidings." And so saying

he craned his neck forward and pretended to look far
away. "What is it you see?" said the Fox. "My master's
Dog is coming towards us," the Rooster said. The Fox
began to turn away as soon as he heard about the dog.
continued

.

.

95

"Will you not stop and congratulate the Dog on the reign

of universal peace?" "I would gladly do so," said the Fox,

"but

I

fear he may not have heard of King Lion's decree."

Cunning often outwits itself.

96

THE WIND AND TH6 SUN
The Wind and theSun were disputing which was the
stronger. Suddenly they saw a traveler coming down the
road, and the Sun said: "I see a way to decide our dispute.

W h ch ever of us can cause th at travel er to take off h s
i

i

cloak shall be regarded as the stronger. You begin." So the

Sun retired behind a cloud, and the Wind began to blow
as hard as it could upon the traveler. But the harder he

blew the more closely did the traveler wrap his cloak

round him, till at last the Wind had to give up in despair.

Then the Sun came out and shone in all his glory upon
thetraveler, who soon found it too hot to walk with his

cloak on.

Kindness effects more than severity.

97

H6PXUL6S AND
THE WKQOhliiK
A Wagoneer was once driving a heavy load along a very
muddy way. At last he came to a part of the road where
the wheels sank half-way into themire, and themore the
horses pulled, the deeper sank the wheels. So the Wag-

oneer threw down his whip, and knelt down and prayed
to Hercules the Strong. "O Hercules, help me in this my

hour of distress," quoth he. ButHerculesappearedtohim,

and said: "Tut, man, don't sprawl there. Get up and put
your shoulder to the wheel."
Fate helps them that help themselves.

98

THE MAN, THE Boy, AND
the donkey
A Man and hisson were once going with their Donkey to
market. As they were wal king, a countryman passed them

and said: "You fools, what is a Donkey for but to ride
upon?" So the M an put the Boy on the Donkey and they

went on their way. But soon they passed a group of men,
one of whom said: "See that lazy youngster, he lets his
fatherwalkwhileherides."SotheMan ordered his Boy to
get off, and got on himself. But they had n't gone far when
they passed two women, one of whom said to the other:
"Shame on that lazy lout to let his poor little son trudge
along." Well, theMan didn't know what to do, butatlast
hetookhisBoy up before him on the Donkey. By this
timethey had come to thetown, and thepassersby began
continued

.

.

99

to jeer and point at them. The Man stopped and asked

what they were scoffing at. The men said: "Aren't you
ashamed of yourself for overloading that poor donkey of
yours?" The M an and Boy got off and tried to think what
to do. They thought and they thought, ti at last they cut
down a pole, tied the don key's feet to it, and raised the
pole and the donkey to their shoulders. They went along
amid the laughter of all who met them till they came to
Market Bridge, when the Donkey, getting one of his feet
loose, kicked out and broke free, then ran away wildly
1

1

never to be seen again by the Man or his Boy. "That will
teach you," said an old man who had followed them:
"Please all, and you will please none."

Please all, and you will please none.

100

THE MIS6R* AND HIS COLD
Onceupon a time there was a Miser who used to hidehis
gold at the foot of a tree in hisgarden. Every week he used
to go and dig it up and gloat over hisgains. A robber, who

had noticed this, went and dug up the gold and escaped
with it. When the Miser next came to gloat over his treasures, hefound nothing but the empty hole. Hetorehis
hair, and raised such an outcry that all the neighbors

came around him, and hetold them how he used to come
and visit hisgold. "Did you ever take any of it out?" asked

one of them. "Nay," said he, "I only came to look at it."
"Then come again and look at the hole," said a neighbor,
"it will

do you just as much good."

W ealth unused might as well not exist.

101

THE FOX AND
THE MOSQUITOES
After crossing a river, a Fox got its tail entangled in a bush

and could not move. A number of Mosquitoes seeing its
plight settled upon it and enjoyed a good meal undis-

turbed by itstai

I

.

A Hedgehog strol ng by took pity upon
I

i

the Fox and went up to it: "You are in a bad way, neighbor," said theHedgehog. "Shall

I

relieve you by driving off

those M osquitoes who are sucki ng your blood?" "Thank
you, M aster Hedgehog," said the Fox, "but

would rather
not." "Why, how isthat?" asked theHedgehog. "Well,
you see," was the answer, "these Mosquitoes have had
theirfill; if you drive these away, others will come with
fresh appetite and bleed me to death."
[Create your own moral.]

I

102

THE FOX WITHOUT X TAIL
happened that a Fox caught its tail in a trap, and in
struggl ng to release hi mself lost al of it but thestump. At
first he was ashamed to show himself among hisfellow
foxes. But at last he determined to put a bolder face upon
It

i

I

his misfortune, and summoned all the foxes to a general

meeting to consider a proposal which he had to place
before them. When they had assembled together the Fox

proposed that they should all do away with their tails. He
pointed out how inconvenient atail was when they were

pursued by their enemies, the dogs; how much it was in

the way when they desired to sit down and hold afriendly
conversation with one another. Hefailed to see any

advantage in carrying about such a useless encumbrance.
continued

.

.

103

"That is all very well," said one of the older foxes; "but

do not think you would have asked us to dispense with
our chief ornament if you had not lost yours."

Do not trust interested advice.

I

104

the 0N€-eyeD Doe
A Doe had had the misfortune to lose one of her eyes, and
could not see any one approaching her on that side. Soto
avoid any danger she always used to feed on a high cliff

nearthesea, with her sound eyelookingtowardstheland.

By this means she could see whenever the hunters
approached heron land, and often escaped. But the hunters found out that she was blind of oneeye, and hiring a

boat rowed under thecliff where sheused to feed and shot

her from the sea. "Ah," cried she with her dying voice,

"you cannot escape your fate."

You cannot escape your fate.

105

B6LLINC TH6 CAT
Long ago, the mice had a general council to consider what
measu res they could take to outwit thei r common enemy,
the Cat. Some said this, and some said that; but at last a
young mouse got upandsaidhehada proposal to make,
which hethought would meet the case. "You will all
agree," said he, "that our chief danger consists in thesly

and treacherous manner in which the enemy approaches
us. Now, if

we could receive some signal of her approach,

we could easily escape from her.

I

venture, therefore, to

propose that a small bell be procured and attached by a
ribbon round the neck of the Cat. By this means we

should always know when she was about, and could easily
retire while she was in the neighborhood." This proposal

met with general applause, until an old mouse got up and
continued

.

.

106
said: "That is all very well, but

who is to bell the Cat?"

The mice looked at one another and nobody spoke. Then
the old mouse said: "It is easy to propose impossible
remedies."
It is easy to propose impossible

remedies.

107

THE HXK6 AND
THE TOKTOISe
The Hare was once boasting of his speed before the other
animals. "I haveneveryet been beaten," said he, "when

put forth my full speed.

I

I

challenge any one hereto race

with me." The Tortoise said quietly, "I accept your chalI

en ge. " "Th at s a good j oke, " sai d th e H are, " cou d dan ce
i

I

I

round you all the way." "Silence your boasting til you've
I

beaten me," answered the Tortoise. "Shall we race?" So a

course was fixed and a start was made. The Hare darted

almost out of sight at once, but soon stopped and, to

show his contempt for theTortoise, lay down to have a
nap. TheTortoise plodded on and plodded on, and when
continued

.

.

108

th e H are awoke from h s n ap, h e saw th eTortoi sej ust n ear
i

thewinning-post and could not run upintimetosavethe
race. Then said the Tortoise: "Plodding wins the race."

Plodding wins the race.

109

THE OLD MAN AND D6ATH
An old laborer, bent double with age and toil, was gathering sticks in a forest. At last he grew so tired and hopeless
that he threw down thebundleof sticks, and cried out: "I

cannot bear this life any longer. Ah,

I

wish Death would

only come and take me!" Just after he spoke, Death, a
grisly skeleton, appeared and said to him: "What would

you

I

ike of me, Mortal?

I

heard you call me." "Please, sir,"

replied the woodcutter, "would you kindly help meto lift

this bundle of sticks on to
1/1/

my shoulder?"

e would often be sorry

if our wishes were gratified.

110

THE HXK6 WITH MANY
FKI6ND5
A Hare was very popular with the other beasts who all
claimed to be her friends. But one day she heard the

hounds approaching and hopedtoescapethem bytheaid
of her many Friends. So she went to the horse, and asked
him to carry her away from the hounds on his back. But
he declined, stating that he had important work to do for
his master. "I'm sure," hesaid, "that the bull would come
to your assistance." She then applied to the bull, and
hoped that he would repel the hounds with his horns.

The bull replied: "I am very sorry, but have an appointment with a lady; but feel sure that our friend the goat
will do what you want." The goat, however, feared that
I

I

continued

.

.

Ill

his back might do her some harm if he took her upon it.

The ram, hefelt sure, was the proper friend to apply to. So
she went to the ram and told him the case. The ram

my dear friend.

do not like to
interfere on the present occasion, as hounds have been
replied: "Another time,

I

known to eat sheep as well as hares." The Hare then
applied, as a last hope, to the calf, who regretted that he

wasunableto help her, ashedid not liketotakethe
responsibility upon himself, as so many older person shad
declined the task. By this time the hounds were quite
near, and the Hare took to her heels and luckily escaped.
She that has many friends, has no
friends.

112

THE LION IN LOV6
A Lion once fell in love with a beautiful maiden and
proposed marriage to her parents. The old people did not

know what to say. They did not keto gi vethei r daughter
I

i

to the Lion, yet they did not wish toenragetheKingof
Beasts. At last the father said: "Wefeel highly honored by

your M ajesty's proposal, but you see our daughter is a

you n g gi rl an d we fear th at as th e obj ect of you r affecti on
you might possibly do her some injury. Might venture to
,

I

suggest that your Majesty should have your claws

removed, and your teeth extracted, then we would gladly
consider your proposal again." The Lion was so much in

lovethat hehad hisdawstrimmed and hisbigteeth taken
continued

.

.

113

out. But when he came again to the parents of the young
girl

they simply laughed in hisface, for he was no longer

fearsome.

Love can tame the wildest.

114

THE BUNDL6 OF STICKS
An old man on the point of death summoned his sons
around him to give them some parting advice. He ordered
hisservantsto bring in a bundle of sticks, and said to his
eldest son: "Break it." The son strained and strained, but

with all his efforts was unable to break the bundle. The
other sons also tried, but none of them was successful.

"Untie the sticks," said the father, "and each of you take
a stick." When they had done so, he called out to them:

"Now, break," and each stick was easily broken. "You see

my meaning," said their father.
Union gives strength.

115

THE LION, THE FOX, XND
TH£ 86MTS
The Lion once announced he was deathly sick and summoned theanimalsto come and hear his last Will and
Testament. So the Goat came to the Lion's cave and listened for a long time. Then a Sheep went in, and then a
Calf came up to receive the last wishes of the Lord of the
Beasts. But soon the Lion seemed to recover, and came to

the mouth of his cave, and saw the Fox, who had been
waiting outside for some time. "Why do you not come to

pay your respects to me?" said the Lion to the Fox. "I beg

your Majesty's pardon," said the Fox, "but

I

noticed the

tracks of the animalsthat have already come to you; and

continued

.

.

116

whilel see many hoof-marks going in,

I

seenonecoming

out. Until those that have entered your cave come out,

prefer to remain in the open air."
It is easier to get into

the enemy's toils

than out again.

I

117

THE MULE'S BRAINS
The Lion and the Fox went hunti ng together. The Li on,
on the advice of the Fox, sent a message to the Mule, proposi n g to make an al an ce between th ei r two fam es.
I

i

i

I

i

The Mule came to the pi ace of meeting, overjoyed at the
prospect of a royal alliance. But when he came there the
Lion simply pounced on the Mule, and said to the Fox:

"Hereisourdinnerfor today. You watch itwhilel go and

haveanapand don't you dare touch my prey." The Lion
went away and theFox waited; but findingth at hismaster
did not return, he ventured to take out the brains of the
Muleand ate them up. When the Lion came back he soon
noticed the absence of the brains, and asked theFox in a
continued

.

.

118
terrible voice: "What have you done with the brains?"

"Brains, your Majesty! it had none, or it would never have
fallen into your trap."

Wit has always an answer ready.

119

THE 6XCL6 AND TH6

AKWW

An Eagle was soaring through the air when suddenly it
heard the whizz of an Arrow, and felt itself wounded to
death. Slowly it fluttered down to the earth, with its lifeblood pouring out of it. Looking down upon the Arrow
with which it had been pierced, it found that the shaft of

the Arrow had been feathered with oneof itsown plumes.
"Alas!" itched, as it died. "Weoften give our enemies the

meansforourown destruction."
1/1/

e often give our enemies

the means for our own destruction.

120

THE MILKMAID AND
H6P. PAIL
A Milkmaid was walking to market carrying her milk in a
pail on her head. As she went along she began calculating

what she would do with the money she would get for the
milk. "I'll buy some fowls from Farmer Brown," said she,
"and they will lay eggs each morning, which will sell to
the parson's wife. With themoneythatl get from the sale
of these eggs I'll buy myself a new dress and anew hat;
and when go to market, won't all the young men come
up and speak to me! Polly Shaw will be that jealous... but
don't care. shall just look at her and toss my head like
this." As she spoke she tossed her head back, the Pail fell
I

I

I

I

continued

.

.

121

was spilt. So she had to go home and
tell her mother what had occurred. "Ah, my child," said
the mother. "Do not count your chickens before they are
off, and all the mi Ik

hatched."

Do not count your chickens
before they are hatched.

122

THE CXT-MXID6N
The gods were once disputi ng whether it was possi ble for
a living being to change its nature. Zeus said "Yes," but

Venus said "No." So, to test the question, Zeus turned a
Cat into a Maiden, and gave her to a young man for a
wife. The wedding was duly performed and the young
couplesatdown to the wedding feast. "See," said Zeus to
Venus, "how becomingly she behaves. Who could tell
that yesterday she was but a Cat? Surely her nature is
changed?" "Wait a minute," replied Venus, and let loose
a mouse into the room. No sooner did the bride see this

than shetried to pounce upon the mouse. "Ah, you see,"
said Venus.

[Create your own moral.]

123

THE H0KS6 XND THE MUL6
A Horse and a Mule were traveling together, the Horse
prancing along in its fine trappings, the Mule carrying
with difficulty the heavy weight in its panniers. "I wish

I

were you," sighed the Mule; "nothing to do and well fed,

and all that fine harness upon you." Next day, however,
there was a great battle, and the Horse was wounded to

death inthefinal charge of the day. Hisfriend, the Mule,

happened to pass by shortly afterwards and found him on
the point of death. "I was wrong," said the Mule. "Better

humble security than gilded danger."
Better humble security than gilded

danger.

124

THE mUMP€T£MXKeN
?K\SOH£K
A Tru m peter d u

ri

n g a battl e ven tu red too n ear th e en amy

and was captured by them. They were about to proceed to
put him to death when he begged them to hear his plea
for mercy. "I do not fight," said he, "and indeed carry no

weapon; only blow thistrumpet, and surely that cannot
I

harm you; then why should you kill me?" "You may not
fight yourself," said the others, "but you encourage and

guide your men to the fight."
1/1/

ords may be deeds.

125

THE BUFFOON AND
TH£ COUNTRYMAN
At a country fair there was a Buffoon who made all the
people laugh by imitating the cries of various animals. He
finished off by squeaking so ike a pig that the spectators
I

thought that he had a porker concealed about him. But a

Countryman who stood by said: "Call that a pig'ssqueak!
Nothing ike it. You give meti tomorrow and will show
you what it's like." The audience laughed, but next day,
sure enough, theCountryman appeared on thestage, and
I

1

1

I

putting his head down squealed so hideously that the
spectators hissed and threw stones at him to make him

continued

.

.

126

stop. "You fools!" hecried. "See what you have been

hissing," and held up a little pig whose ear he had been

pinching to make him utter the squeals.

People often applaud an imitation

and hiss the real thing.

127

THE OLD WOMAN AND
TH£ WIN6-JXK
You must know that sometimes old women ike a glass of
wine. Oneof thissort once found a wine-jar lying in the
road, and eagerly went up to it hoping to find it full. But
when shetookitupshefoundthatall the wine had been
drunk out of it. Still she took a long sniff at the mouth of
thejar. "Ah," shecried, "What memoriescling around the
I

instruments of our pleasure."

W hat memories cling around
the instruments of our pleasure.

128

THE FOX AND TH6 COXT
By an unlucky chance a Fox fell into a deep well from

which he could not get out. A Goat passed by shortly
afterwards, and asked the Fox what he was doing down
there. "Oh, have you not heard?" said the Fox; "there is

umped down here n
order to besureto have water by me. Why don't you come
down too?" The Goat thought well of this advice, and
jumped down into the well. But the Fox immediately
goi ng to be a great drought, so

I

j

i

jumped on her back, and by putting hisfoot on her long
horns managed to jump up to the edge of the wel
"Good-bye, friend," said the Fox, "remember next time,
I

'Never trust the advice of a person in difficulties.'"

Never trust the advice of a person in
difficulties.

129

INDEX OF TITL65
•

Androcles and the Lion

•

The Ant and the Grasshopper

•

The Ass and the Lapdog

•The Ass in the Lion's Skin
•Avaricious and Envious
•

The Bald M an and the Fly

•

The Bat, the Birds, and the Beasts

•

Bel ling the Cat

•The Belly and the Members
•

The Buffoon and the Countryman

•

The Bundle of Sticks

130

The Cat-Maiden
The Crow and the Pitcher
The Dog and the Shadow
The Dog and the Wolf
The Dog n the M anger
i

The Eagle and the Arrow
The Fisher
The Fisher and the Little Fish
The Four Oxen and the Lion
The Fox and the Cat
The Fox and the Crow
The Fox and the Goat

131

The Fox and the Grapes
The Fox and the Lion
The Fox and the M ask
The Fox and the M osquitoes
The Fox and the Stork
The Fox without a Tail
The Fox, the Rooster, and the Dog
The Frog and the Ox
The Frogs Desi ng a Ki ng
ri

The Goose with the Golden Eggs
The Hare and the Tortoise
TheHarewith Many Friends

132

The Hares and the Frogs
The Hart and the Hunter
The Hart in the Ox-Stall
Hercules and the Wagoneer

The Horse and the M ule
The Horse, Hunter, and Stag
The J ay and the Peacock
The Laborer and the Nightingale
The Lion and the M ouse
The Lion and the Statue
The Lion in Love
The Lion's Share

133

The Lion, the Fox, and the Beasts
The Man and HisTwo Wives
The M an and the Satyr
The M an and the Serpent
The Man and the Wood
The Man and the Wooden God
The Man, the Boy, and the Donkey
The Milkmaid and Her Pail
The Miser and HisGold
The Mountains in Labor
The Mule's Brains
The N urse and the Wolf

134

The Old Man and Death
The Old Woman and the Wine-Jar
The One-Eyed Doe
The Peacock and Hera
The Serpent and the File
The Shepherd's Boy
The Sick Lion
The Swallow and the Other Birds
The Tortoise and the Birds

TheTown Mouse and the Country Mouse
The Tree and the Reed
The Trumpeter Taken Prisoner

135

The Two Crabs
The Two Fellows and the Bear
The Two Pots

TheWind and theSun
The Wolf and the Crane

TheWolfandtheKid
The Wolf and the Lamb
The Wolf in Sheep's Clothing
The Woodman and the Serpent
The Young Thief and His Mother

136

INDEX OF MORALS
•A liar will not be believed, even when he speaks the
truth.

•A little thing in hand is worth more than a great thing
in prospect.

must work together.

•

All

•

Any excuse wi

•

Appearances are deceptive.

•

Better beans and bacon in peace than cakes and ale
i

1

1

serve a tyrant.

n fear.

•

Better humble security than gilded danger.

•

Better no rule than cruel rule.

137

Better one safe way than a hundred on which you

cannot reckon.
Better starve free th an be a fat si ave.

Beware lest you lose the substance by grasping at the
shadow.
Beware wh at you gi ve to f utu re en em es.
i

Clumsy jesting is no joke.

Cunning often outwits itself.
Destroy the seed of evil, or it will grow up to be

your ruin.

Do not count your chickens before they are hatched.
Do not trust flatterers.
Do not trust interested advice.

138

Enemies' promises were made to be broken.

Example is the best precept.
Familiarity breeds contempt.

Fate helps them that help themselves.

Fine clothes may disguise, but si My words will disclose
a fool

Gratitude and greed go not together.
Gratitude is the sign of noble souls.

Greed often overreaches itself.

Hethat is neither onething northeother hasno
friends.

you allow people to use you for your own purposes,
they wi use you for thei rs.
If

1

1

139
»

Injuries may be forgiven, but not forgotten.

prepare for the days of necessity.

•

It is best to

•

It is easier to get into

»

It is easy to

•

It is easy to despise

•

It is easy to

»

It is

•

It is useless attacking

»

Kindness effects more than severity.

•

Little by little does the trick.

»

Little friends

•

Love can tame the wildest.

the enemy's toils than out again.

be brave from a safe distance.

what you cannot get.

propose impossible remedies.

not only fine feathers that make fine birds.

the insensible.

may prove great friends.

140

People often applaud an imitation and hiss the real thing.

Much outcry, little outcome.
Never soar aloft on an enemy's wings.
Never trust a friend who deserts you at a pinch.
Never trust the ad vice of a person in difficulties.

No gratitude from the wicked.
N oth n g escapes th e master's eye.
i

Obscurity often brings safety.

One bad turn deserves another.
Onecannot be first in everything.
Only cowards insult dying majesty.
Outside show is a poor substitute for nner worth.
i

141

People often grudge others what they cannot enjoy
themselves.
PI ease all,

and you will please none.

Plodding wins the race.
Self-conceit may lead to self-destruction.

She that has many friends, has no friends.
Sorrow not over what is lost forever.

Teach a child well.

The strong and the weak cannot keep company.
There is always someone worse off than yourself.

Union gives strength.
United we stand, divided we fall.

142

Vices are their own punishment.

We can easily represent things as we wish them to be.
We often despise what is most useful to us.
We often give our enemies the means for our
own destruction.

We would often be sorry

if

our wishes were gratified.

Wealth unused might as well not exist.

What memories cl ng around the nstruments of
i

i

our pleasure.

When you are in a person's power you must do as
they bid.

Wit has always an answer ready.

Words may be deeds.

143

•Yield to all and you will soon have nothing to yield.
•

You cannot escape your fate.

•

You may share the labors of the great, but you will not
share the rewards.

•You will only injure yourself if you take notice of
despicable enemies.
•

[Create your own moral. (1)]

•

[Create your own moral. (2)]

•

[Create your own moral. (3)]

•

[Create your own moral. (4)]

144

HOW TO CR6AT6
VOVR OWN CLOSSARV
AK1D QV6JT10N PACES
The Question pages in this book are only an example
what you can do with online books using Acrobat software. You can easily add questions to those we've supplied, oryou might wanttoreplaceourquestionsenti rely.
You can also add a Glossary and link words in thefables
to their definitions.

You can also use Acrobat Exchange to add notes to pages
that can be saved with the book and printed as a separate
file. You might want to use notes to define a word or
phrase, to ask a question, or just to comment on some-

thing in the book. After adding your notes, you can use

145

the Create Notes File command to create a list of all
the notes in the file: this procedure is a quick way, for
example, to create a Glossary you can save and print as
a separate file.

Adding or replacing pages in this book is a three-step
process:

1 Use a word processing program to create a document

with your question or glossary pages.
2 Use the PDF Writer (installed with the Acrobat

Exchange program) to create a PDF file from your
document.
3 Use the Exchange program to delete the original
question pages and add the pages you made.

146

STEP 1: CREATE A DOCUMENT

You can use any word processi ng or page layout program
to create your question document. The floppy disk containing Aesop's Fables, however, in dudes a Microsoft®
Word template file for new question pages and for Glossary pages. If you use M icrosoft Word, you can use the
template files to create pages that look ike the originals.
I

Note: The Microsoft 1/1/ ord template files do not use the same
fonts and graphic elements that were used to create the fables.
If you have a page layout program, you can create pages that

look more like the fable pages.

To use the Microsoft Word template:
l Copy thetemplatefilefrom the distribution disk
to your hard disk. For Windows, the template files are
called QUE5TION.DOC andTEMPLATE.DOC. For the

147

Macintosh, the templates files are called Question Tempi ate an d

G ossary Tern pi ate.
I

2 In Microsoft Word, open the tempi ate file, and then

open a new file.
3 Select all the text on the template page and choose

Copy from the Edit menu.
4 Select the new file, and choose Paste from the Edit

menu. A copy of thetemplate page is inserted at the
begi nn ng of your document.
i

5 To create additional pages, choose Page Break from the
I

nsert menu and then choose thePastecommand for each

page you plan to make. Don't worry about making

enough pages. You can always make more if you need
them.
6 For each new page, replace the filler text with your

own text. Save the file.

148

To create question or glossary pages with another
word processor:
You can use any word processor or page layout program
to makequestion or glossary pages. Keep in mind, however, the following points:

Use a font that is available on the viewing computers.
The Acrobat Reader program can make substitute fonts,
•

but substitute fonts require memory and slow document

d spl ay Th e q uesti on tern pi ate f e uses H el veti ca for ti tl es
i

.

i

I

and questions.
•

Use a point size that is easy to read on-screen. The orig-

inal question
•

pages use 14-point type for the questions.

Remember to put a "Return to fable" line at the end

of your questions. Later you will use this lineto create a
link button that
fable.

I

i

nks the questions to the correspondi ng

149

STEP 2: CREATE A PDF FILE
Usetheinstructionsontheback of your Acrobat Exchange

Quick Reference card or in the Exchange online guide to
learn how to create a PDF file from your question pages.

STEP 3: INSERT THE NEW PAGES

To add new pages to the fables, open the fables document
with the Exchange program and follow these steps:
1 If you wantto replace pages, delete the originals. Choose

Delete Page from the Edit menu and select a single pageor
a range of pages to delete.
2 Choose Insert from the File menu to add pages to the
fables. Identify the PDF file you made from your question

or glossary pages and tell the Exchange program where in

the fables document to insert the new pages.

150

3 Choose Crop Pages from the Ed it menu to trim the
i

n serted pages to th e si ze of th e fabl e pages. For a stan dard

U S letter page, the correct crop margi ns for the fables are
Left: 50

Top: 72

Right: 79

Bottom: 332

Note For Shakespeare's Sonnets, change the Left value to 90
and the Right value to 89.
4 U se th e n k tool n th e Exch an ge program to create
I

i

i

hypertext links between the new pages and the fables.
•

To link the fables to thequestions, click the link tool,

double-click the link button surrounding the question

mark on the fable page, go to the question page, and set
the new link destination. Reverse this procedure for linking the questions to the fables.

151

•To link a word in afabletotheword'sdefinition in the
Glossary, use the technique described above for linking

question pages to the fables. You might, however, want to

W

nk button around thedefi ned term. ith
visible link buttons, readers can tell at a glance which
words are defined in the Glossary.
createa visi ble

I

i

Note If you link more than one occurrence of a word to the
Glossary, instruct your readers to use the Go Back button (or

command) to return from the Glossary to the fable they
were reading.

See the Exchange on ne guide for more nformati on
I

about usi ng the

I

i

i

n k tool

i

152

HOW TO PRJNT AND
MXK6VOUR. OWN BOOK
You can print all or any part of Aesop's Fables to make
your own book. Choose thefables you want n your book,
i

and then print them. For the best results, use a laser
printer. If you want to include questions for thefables,

print those pages, too.
Print the pages at full size; do not choose the printing

option "Shrink to Fit." The book can be printed on laser
printers capable of black-and-white, grayscale, and color.

153

l Print the pages. Put the pages in order. Use scissors
to cut out the page. Cut around the black border on the

1

page.

21

THE FOX AND THE CKOW
A Fox once saw a Crow fly off with a piece of cheese in its beak and settle on a branch of
a tree. "That's for me," said the Fox, and he walked up to the foot of the tree. "Good day.

Mistress Crow," he cried. "How well you are looking today: how glossy your feathers;

how bright your eyes.

1

feel

sure your voice must surpass that of other birds, just as your

figure does. Let me hear but one song from you that

1

may greet you as the Queen of

Birds." The Crow lifted up her head and began to caw her best, but the moment she

opened her mouth the piece of cheese fell to the ground, only to be snapped up by the
Fox. "That will do," said he. "That was all

1

wanted. In exchange for your cheese

1

will

give you a piece of advice for thefuture:Q

Do not trust flatterers.

Q^

9

154

2 Beginning with the first page, paste the back of the

even -numbered page to the back of the odd-numbered

page so that the borders are al igned. Pages 1 and 2 go
together, then pages 3 and 4, 5 and 6, and so forth. M ake

sure that the pages are pasted together correctly.

Glue along edges

155

3 After the pages have dried, use a paper hole punch or

binder hole punch to put two holes into each sheet at the

same location throughout the book.
TH6 FOX AND TH6 CROW
A Fox once saw a Crow fly off with a piece of cheese in its beak and settle on a branch of
a tree. "That's for me," said the Fox, and he walked up to the foot of the tree. "Good day,

Mistress Crow," he cried. "How well you are looking today: how glossy your feathers;

how bright your eyes.

I

feel

sureyour voice must surpass that of other birds, just as your

figure does. Let me hear but one song from you that

I

may greet you as the Queen of

Birds." The Crow lifted up her head and began to caw her best, but the moment she

opened her mouth the piece of cheese fell to the ground, only to be snapped up by the
Fox. "That will do," said he. "That was all

I

wanted. In exchange for your cheese

give you a piece of advice for the future:Q

Do not trust flatterers.

I

will

156

4 Bind the book by inserting a string, shoelace, or piece of
leather through the holes of the pages and tying a firm

knot. Be sure to put the pages in order (the odd-numbered

page should always be facing you). When the pages have
been bound, use scissors to trim away any paper that
sticks out from the rest. Use crayons or markers to color

your favorite fables or draw your own illustrations.

ASO?'S FABLES

157

FABL6 QUESTIONS

158

9
TH£ WOLF AND
TH£ LAMB
1

Who isthetyrant in thefable? Why?

2 Give an exam pie of yourself, or someone else, who has
acted

I

i

ke a tyrant at one ti me or another.

3 Click the arrow below to reread thefable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

159

9
TH6 DOC AND
THE SHADOW
1

Why did the dog try to take the meat from his reflec-

tion? Was he hungry?

2 Do you think a dog would really do this? Why or why

not?
3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

160

9
TH6 LION'S SHXKt
1

Why did thefox walk away with histail between his

legs?

2 Did the fox deserve to have part of the reward?

3 Who do you think issaying the moral attheendof the
story?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

161

9
TH6 WOLF AND
TH£ CKKUe
Why do you think the crane helped thewolf?
2 Why did the crane ask the wolf for the reward?
1

3 Was the wolf right in refusing to give a reward to the
crane? Why?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

162

9
TH6 MXN AND
TH£ SeWENT
Why did the man bring honey and food to the snake?
2 Why did the snake refuse the food and honey from the
1

man?
3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

163

9
TH6 TOWN MOUS6 AND
TH6 COUNTRY MOUS6
Why did the mice go to the city?
2 Why did the country mouse go back home?
1

3 What is the difference between the country mouse and

the town mouse?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

164

9
TH6 FOX AND
TH£ CKOW
1

Who is the flatterer in thefable?

2 What is the purpose of the flattery?

3 Why do you think the crow enjoyed being flattered?

4 Click the arrow below to reread thefable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

165

9
4

THE SICK LION
Why did the other animals attack the lion?
2 Why was the ass the last animal to attack?
l

3 A modern saying is "Don't kick a person when they're

down." Isthat similar to thismoral? Why? In what way is
it different?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^<

'

166

9
TH£ ASS AND
TH£ LXPDOC
1

Why did the ass imitate the dog?

2 What happened to the ass? Why?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

167

9
*

TH£ LION XND
THE MOUSE
1

Why did the lion let the mouse go?

2 How did the mouse help the lion? Why?

3

W ho earned something in thi stable— the mouse or the
I

lion? What did he learn?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

168

9
4

THE SWXLLOW XND
TH£ OTHER. BIPEDS
l What is the seed of evil in the fable? Why?

2 What did theswallow tell theother birdstodo?Why?

3 What are some examples of seeds of evil in the world

today?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^<

'

1

169

9
4

TH£ FKOQS D6SIPJNC

X K.1NCJ
l

Why do you think Zeus sent the frogs a log instead of a

king?
2 Why did the frogs ask for a second king?

3 Why did Zeus get angry?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^<

'

170

9
TH6 MOUNTAINS
IN

LXBOK

1 What did the country folk think would happen?

2 Why isthisfable called "The Mountains in Labor?"

3 Suppose the mountain actually did blow up. Can you

think of a different moral to fit that ending of the fable?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

171

9
TH£ HXP.6S AND
TH£ FKOQS
Why did the hares want to drown themselves?
2 Why did they decide not to?
1

3 What animals might thefrogs see that would make

them say the same thing the hares said?
4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

172

9
TH6 WOLF AND
TH£ KID
1

Why did the kid yell at the wolf from thetop of the

house?
2 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

173

9
TH6 WOODMAN AND
*

1

Why did the woodman pick up the serpent from the

snow?
2 Why did the snake want to bite the children?

3 What did the woodman learn in thefable?

4 Click the arrow below to reread thefable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

174

9
TH6 BALD MAN
AND TH6 FLY
Why did the man hit himself on the head?
2 Why did the man stop hitting himself?
1

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

175

9
TH6 FOX AND
TH£ STOPJ<
1 How did the fox trick the stork?

2 How did the stork get back at the fox?

3 Why did the fox and stork play tricks on each other?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

176

9
4

TH£ FOX XND
IH£

MMK

l

Why was the fox afraid when he first saw the mask?

2 What did the fox mean when he said, "It's a pity you

haven't got any brains?"

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^<

'

1

177

9
TH£ JXy AND
TH£ PEACOCK
Why did the peacocks pull the feathers off the jay?
2 Why were the other jays annoyed?
1

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

178

9
TH£ FKOC XND
TH£ OX
Why did the little frog think he had seen a monster?
2 Why did the father frog try to show hisson thattheox
1

was not so big?
3 Why did the father frog burst?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

179

9
ANDP.OCLB
Why did Androcles help the lion?
2 Why did the lion become Androcles' friend?
1

3 What do you think the emperor learned when Androcles told him the whole story?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

180

9
TH£ BXT, TH£ BIM)S,
XND TH£ BEASTS
Why didn't the bat want to join the birds or the beasts?
2 Why did both the bi rdsand the beasts turn the bat away
1

when hetried to join them?
3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

181

9
4

TH£ HAM AND
TH£ HUNTER.
l

Why did the hart wish for sturdier legs?

2 How did the hunter catch up with the hart?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^<

'

182

9
4

the seweNi and
THE FILE
l

Why did the snake attack the file?

2 What do you think "attacking the insensible" means?

3 What are some other examples of "attacking the insensible?"

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^<

'

1

183

9
*

TH6 MXN AND
TH£ WOOD
1 Do you think the trees should have been suspicious

when they saw the man with only the axe head?
2 How could the trees have avoided being cut down by

the man's axe?
3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

184

9
TH6 DOC AND
TH£ WOLF
1

Why did the house-dog want to help the wolf?

2 Find the fable "The Town Mouse and Country Mouse"

and compare its story and moral with the story and moral
of "The Dog and the Wolf."

3 Why did the wolf leave the house-dog?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

185

9
4

THE B6LLY AND
TH£ MEMBERS
l What did the other body parts want the belly to do?

2 How did they try to force the belly to do what they

wanted?
3 What did the body parts learn?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^<

'

186

9
4

TH6 HAW IN
TH£ OX-STALL
Why do you think the master was able to find the hart?
2 Why didn't the stable boys or the hunter see the hart?
l

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^<

'

1

187

9
4

THE FOX XND
THE CKXP6S
Why did the fox walk away from the grapes?
2 Why did the fox say the grapes were sour?
l

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^<

'

188

9
TH6 HOfcje, HUNT6K,
and rcxc
Why did the horse go to the hunter?
2 Why did the hunter help the horse?
1

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

189

9
TH£ PeXCOCK

XND HtKX
1 What did the peacock want from Hera?

2 Why did Hera refuse?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

190

9
*

TH6 FOX AND
IH£ LION
1

Why was the fox afraid when he first saw the lion?

2 How did the fox feel about the lion after thethird

meeting?
3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

191

9
*

TH£ LION XND
THE STXTUe
1

Why do you think the statue showed the man being

stronger?

2 If the lion made the statue, do you think the statue

would have been different? How?
3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

192

9
*

TH£ ANT AND TH6

QKKSSHOVViK
1

Why did the ant tell the grasshopper to put food away

for the winter?

2 Why did the grasshopper die?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

193

9

me TP.ee xnd
the ReeD
1 What did thetreetell the reed?

2 Why did the reed feel safer than the tree?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

194

9
THE FOX AND
THE CAT
1 What did thefox tell thecat?

2 Why didn't thefox escape the hounds?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

195

9
TH£ WOLF IN
SHIP'S CLOTHINC
1 How did the wolf trick the lamb?

2 Why did thelambthinkthewolf wasoneof thesheep?

3 What are some examples of things that look safe but

may be dangerous?
4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

196

9
*

TH6 DOC IN TH£

MXNC6K
1 How was the dog using the manger?

2 How did the ox want to use the manger?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

197

9
TH6 MAN AND TH£

WOODEN COD
1 What did the man want from the wooden idol?

2 Why did the man get angry?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. What do you

think would be a good moral for this fable?

^c

198

9
1 Once the fisher had caught thefish in his net, the fish

did whatever the fisher asked. Why?

2 Did thefish want to dance?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

199

9
the SHePHewrs soy
1

Why did the boy lie?

2 What are some other problems the boy could have

caused? Was his own life in danger?
3 Why didn't the villages believe the boy the last time he
cried wolf?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

200

9
TH6VOUNC THI6F
AND HIS MOTHGK
1 How could the mother have helped her son when he
stole small things as a boy?

2 Why do you think the mother did not punish her son

when hestolethings?
3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

201

9
TH6 MXN AND
his two wives
1 What did the man yield?

2 Can a person look both old and young at the same

time?
3 Could this story have been about a woman who had

two husbands?
4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

202

9
*

TH£ WOLF
1 Did the nurse really mean to throw the child to the

wolf?
2 Why did the wolf believe the nurse?

3 How was the nurse an enemy to the wolf?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

203

9
TOPsTOISe XND

TH£ 8IPJM
1

W h at was th e tortoi se's m stake?
i

2 How could the tortoise have reached its new home
safely?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

204

9
TH6 TWO CKXBS
1 Could the mother crab walk straight forward if she

wanted to?
2 What does the word "accustom" mean as it is used in
this fable?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

205

9
TH£ ASS IN TH£
LION'S SKIN
Why was the donkey proud of himself?
2 Why wasn't the fox fooled?
1

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

206

9
*

TH£ TWO FALLOWS
XND THE BGXK
1 What does the phrase "in a pinch" mean?

2 Did the bear really whisper those words to the second
fellow?

3 What would thefirst fellow have done if he were a true
friend?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

207

9
TH6 TWO POTS
1 What is an earthenware pot made of?

Why would

it

break more easi ly than a brass pot?
2 Why wasn't the brass pot worried about hitting the

earthenware pot?
3 Give some examples of some strong and weak things
that cannot keep company.

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

208

9
*

TH£ FOUK OX6N
XND TH£ LION
1

Why couldn't the ion kill the oxen when they all stood
I

together?
2 How could the oxen have stayed alive?

3 When peoplebecomedivided,dotheybecomestronger
or weaker?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

209

9
THE FISHEK AND
THE LITTLE FISH
1 Doyouthinkthelittlefish would have allowed itself to
get caught later in the year?

2 Why did the littlefish ask the fisher to let him go?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

210

9
AVARICIOUS

AND ENVIOUS
1 In theend, did either neighbor win? Why?

2 Why wasn't the neighbor satisfied with the two rooms
of gold?

3 Bad habits and vices are the subject of most of Aesop's
Fables. Can you name some other vices in the fables that

make bad things happen?
4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

211

9
*

TH6 CP.OW AND
IH£ PITCHGK
1 What would have happened to the crow if he had

become impatient and left the pitcher?
2 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

212

9
*

TH6 MXN AND
TH£ SKTYK
1 Was the man's breath really hot and cold?

2 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. What do you

think would make a good moral for this fable?

^c

213

9
TH£ C00S6 WITH TH6
cold£im eccs
1 What was the man hoping to find inside the goose?

2 Did the man get any more golden eggs after killing the

goose?
3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

214

9
IH£ K]ICHTINCXL£
1 There are three popular morals to this fable: "Never
believe a captive's promise," "Keep what you have," and

"Sorrow not over what is lost forever." Which of the
morals do you prefer? Why?
2 Why shouldn't the laborer have trusted the nightingale?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

215

9
*

TH6 FOX, TH6 ROOSTS,
X1MD TH£ DOC
1 How did the rooster outwit the fox? Did hereallyseehis

master's dog?

2 Lying, exaggerating, and many other ways of

presenting yourself falsely to others is a common theme
in Aesop's Fables. Can you think of other examplesof this

theme in the other fables?
3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

216

9
TH6 WIND AND
TH£ SUN
1 What does the sun represent?

2 Why couldn't the wind blow the man's coat off?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

217

9
H£KCUUS XND TH£
1

Why didn't H ercu es help the wagon eer?
I

2 What did Hercules want the wagon eer to do?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

218

9
*

TH£ MAN, TH6 Boy,
X1MD TH£ D0NK6Y
1

Why did the man and the boy tie the donkey on the

pole?

2 What does Aesop mean (in the moral) that if you try to
please everyone you will please no one?

3 Howaretheman andtheboy in thisfableliketheman
in "The

Man and HisTwo Wives?"

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

219

9
HIS COLD
1

Why did the miser look at his gold all thetime?

2 How could the miser have avoided having his gold
stolen?

3 What did the miser use his gold for? What might he

have used it for?
4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

220

9
TH6 FOX XND TH£

MOSQUITOES
Why does the hedgehog offer to help the fox?
2 Why does thefox refuse his help?
1

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. What do you

think would make a good moral for this fable?

^c

221

9
*

TH£ FOX WITHOUT
A TAIL
1

Why did thefox try to convince the other foxes to give

up their tails?
2 When thefox met with the other foxes he was

"lobbying" for a decision. What does "lobbying" mean?
3 People who lobby for something are not always as motivated by personal interest as the fox was. How can you

decide whether people are lobbying without personal
benefit in mind?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

222

9
the oisie-eyeD Doe
1 What does the word "fate" mean in the moral of the
fable?

2 Why did the doe feel she was safe?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

223

9
B6LLINC TH6 CAT
1 What was wrong with the idea of belling the cat?

2 What other "impossible remedies" mightthemicehave

proposed?
3 Find the fable "The Crow and the Pitcher." The crow
faced a problem but found a remedy. How was the crow's
solution different from the solution suggested by the

young mouse?
4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

224

9
*

TH6 HXK6 XND
TH£ T0M01J6
1 Aharecan run much fasterthan atortoise.

Why did the

tortoise win?

2 Can you think of other activities in which a slow and

steady pace will win over a fast and impatient pace?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

225

9
*

TH£ OLD MXN

AND D6XTH
1 Did the woodcutter really wish to die?

2 Why did the woodcutter makea wish hedidn'twantto

come true?
3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

226

9
TH6 HXP.6 WITH

MANY FW6NDJ
1 Were any of the animals truly the hare's friends?

2 Why didn't the animals want to helpthehare?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

227

9
*

TH6 LION IN
LOVG
1 How might the lion have argued for the daughter's

hand without trimming his claws or removing histeeth?
2 Why didn't the girl's parents let the lion marry their

daughter after he trimmed hisclawsand removed his
teeth?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

228

9
TH6 BUNDLE OF
STICKS
1

Why is

it easier for all

the sons to break the sticks indi-

vidually than for one of the sons to break the bundle?

2 How are the old man's sons ike the sticks?
I

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

229

9
*

TH6 LION, TH6 FOX,
XND TH£ BEASTS
1 What happened to theanimalswho went into thel ion's

cave?
2 Why didn't the fox believe the lion was deathly ill?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

230

9
TH£ MULE'S 8KXINS
1

Why shouldn't the mule have trusted the lion?

2 How did the fox's wit get him what he wanted?

3 Do you think the lion will fall for the fox's wit?

4 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

231

9
4

the exqu and
IH£ AMvOW
l What had the eagle given the hunter that led to the
eagle's destruction?

2 Who is the eagle's enemy in thefable?

3 Click the arrow below to reread thefable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^<

'

232

9
4

THE MILKMAID

AND H£K PAIL
l How did the maid think the pail of milk would lead to

a dress and hat?
2 How could the maid have saved the pail of milk?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^<

'

1

233

9
TH6 CXT-MXID6N
1 What did Zeus believe? What did Venus believe?

2 How did they settle the argument? Who was right?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. What do you

think would make a good moral for this fable?

^c

234

9
TH£ H0P.S6 AND
TH£ MULG
1

Why did the mule envy the horse?

2 Themulesaidthehorsehadnothingtodo, butthatwas

wrong. What did the horse do?
3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

235

9
TXKGN PKIS01M6K
1

Why didn't thetrumpeterthinkhisenemiesshould kill

him?
2 How did the trumpeter's playing his trumpet harm his

enemies?
3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

236

9
4

TH£ BUFFOON XND
TH6 COUNTRYMAN
l How did the buffoon make people laugh?

2 What did the country man say about the buffoon? How
did he prove it?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^<

'

1

237

9
TH£ OLD WOMAN AND
*

TH6 WIN6-JXK
1 What was the old woman remembering when she

smelled the wine jar?
2 Do you remember certain things when you smell some-

thing ike freshly cut grass, smoke from a fireplace, or a
I

certain kind of food?

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

238

9
TH6 FOX AND
TH£ COAT
Why did the goat jump into the well?
2 Why did thefox want the goat to jump intothewell?
1

3 Click the arrow below to reread the fable. How would

you say the moral in your own words?

^c

239

m
ADOBE
PRESS

Adobe Press books examine the art and
technology of creating, displaying, printing,
and communicating digital documents.

