In this work, we develop and trained machine learning models
for the detection and classification of cassava (Manihot
esculenta Crantz) disease as Blight or Mosaic. Our emphasis
here was on two major cassava diseases that occur in Nigeria
which are the Cassava Mosaic Disease (CMD) and the Cassava
Bacterial Blight disease (CBBD). A total of 46 models were
trained in two categories from over 18,000 cassava leaf images
was collected at different times of day containing leaves at
different levels of symptom manifestation. One model
diagnosed the healthy leaf and the other model detected the
diseases that are present on the leaf when diagnosed as an
unhealthy leaf and two most accurate models were exported. A
5-fold cross-validation was used to test the Cubic Support
Vector Machine (CSVM) model developed for health diagnosis
and the Coarse Gaussian Support Vector Machine (CGSVM)
model developed for disease detection which yielded accuracies
of 83.9% and 61.6% respectively.
Keywords: Author Guide, Article, Camera-Ready Format,
Paper Specifications, Paper Submission.
1. INTRODUCTION
Machine learning is a computational problem-solving
method used in solving problems involving very complex
patterns which will usually be unreasonable to expect a
human programmer to explicitly identify and develop
into a program. The term machine learning also refers to
the automated detection of meaningful patterns in data
(Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David, 2014), it is an
applicable tool in disease detection that helps to control
the adverse effect of the plant diseases on food
production generally. Furthermore, the importance of this
fact is strengthened when global demographic data is
considered. The present estimated world population
stands at 7.6 billion and by 2050, the world population is
projected to have reached a 10 billion mark. Despite
these projected population, the landmass that is available
for the ever increasing human population remains
unchanged where out of which only 11.58%
(17.25million sq. km, 6.66million sq.km) is for
agricultural use. (Central Intelligence Agency, 2016;
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social
Affairs, Population Division, 2017) with the human
population consuming about 2940 kcal per capita per day
of food. (Vasileska, 2012).
Cassava (Manihot esculenta Crantz) is an annual root
crop that grows in tropical and subtropical regions and
the most widely grown root crop that produces an edible
tuber which is a third major source of carbohydrates after
rice and maize for about 800 million people worldwide
(FAO, 2013). Generally, it is classified as sweet or bitter
based on the quantity of the cyanide compounds found in
it and the global production is about 203 million
megatonnes (Alexandratos and Bruinsma, 2012). Despite
its usefulness to the existence of human, research has
shown that over 30 diseases with causes ranging from
virus to bacteria to fungi to many other agents but with
most of their symptoms being visibly observable. The
effects of these diseases also span a wide spectrum which
can range from affecting plant establishment and vigour
to inhibiting photosynthetic efficiency to causing
preharvest or postharvest deterioration. In sub-Saharan
Africa with Nigeria as the case study, the most
predominant cassava diseases that are commonly found
are Firstly the cassava bacterial blight disease (CBBD)
which is caused by the bacterium
Xanthomonasaxonopodispv. Manihotis, Xam, and
bacterial disease mostly found in the cassava belt
worldwide with a very elusive causal agent that possesses
several means of survival and various modes of
dissemination to the plant; also evidenced by progressive
symptoms on the cassava leaf. The early visible
symptoms are translucent water-soaked spots which over
time become angular dark green spots on the leaf. The 
International Journal of Computer Science and Software Engineering (IJCSSE), Volume 8, Issue 7, July 2019 167
O. Emuoyibofarhe et. al
spots then enlarge and merge to form large brown
patches which affect the leaf parts by the tips and
eventually shows a superficially burnt appearance.
(Antoine, Amégnikin and Wydra, 2016).
Secondly, the cassava mosaic which is a virus-induced
cassava disease and found mostly in Africa and India
with the identified causative Geminiviruses seem in the
Indian cassava mosaic virus (ICMV), the African cassava
mosaic virus (ACMV) and the East African cassava
mosaic virus (EACMV). The symptoms include
observable mosaic patterns on the leaves of the affected
plants, the leaf appearing pale yellow with only a tinge of
green, general leaf whiteness and leaf paleness. (CABI,
2018).
2. REVIEW OF RELATED WORKS
During the late 1900s, cassava was assumed to be
resistant to pests and to diseases. Researchers have
discovered that over 30 diseases ranging from virus,
bacteria, fungi and to many other agents seen in cassava
plant. The effects of these diseases also span a wide
spectrum which can range from affecting plant
establishment and vigour to inhibiting photosynthetic
efficiency thereby causing preharvest or postharvest
deterioration. Some of the causal agents (virus, bacteria,
and fungi) are distributed worldwide, appearing in almost
all cassava plantations worldwide while others are
limited to specific regions, countries or continents
possibly because their dissemination occurs mainly
through the use of infected planting material for
propagation. Due to the prevalence of the pests and
diseases, the yield of the cassava crop has reduced so
great leading to low productivity. Although the total
losses caused by the Cassava Mosaic Disease are
extremely difficult to estimate, it remains a major cause
of yield loss. The losses depend on the variety and stage
of infection, which can usually be substantial. Yield
losses of 25-95% are reported. (Bisimwa and
Walangululu, 2015). Despite the challenges derive from
the effect of the disease which leads to low yield in
productions. Some researchers have carried out a number
of studies on cassava disease and other plant-related
diseases and among them are the agriculturist, life
scientists, and biologists.
In Sue Han Lee et al 2017 presented a paper on how deep
learning extracts and learns leaf features for plant
classification and used convolutional neural networks
(CNN) and deconvolutional network (DN) approach to
obtain results that show that different orders of venation
are the best representative features and that multi-level
representation exists only in leaf data corresponding to
species classes, which fits with the hierarchical botanical
definitions of leaf characters. It was discovered that the
work grants insights into the design of new hybrid
feature extraction models and improves the
discriminative power of plant classification systems but
focused more on the leaf feature extraction rather than
actual disease detection. Also, Konstantinos P.
Ferentinos 2018 in a paper titled deep learning models
for plant disease detection and diagnosis worked at
developing convolutional neural network models to
perform plant disease detection and diagnosis using
simple leaves images of healthy and diseased plants,
through deep learning methodologies. Training of the
models was performed with the use of an open database
of 87,848 images, containing 25 different plants in a set
of 58 distinct classes of plant and disease combinations,
including healthy plants. The work achieved the best
performance of a very high success rate of 99.53% which
deemed it significantly high resulting in the model to be a
very useful advisory or early warning tool but the dataset
used contained unverified images causing inaccuracy in
selected cases and the focus was not on cassava and/or
cassava diseases. While in Amanda Ramcharan et al
2017 a work on deep learning for image-based cassava
disease detection using a dataset of cassava disease
images was considered which was taken in a field in
Tanzania. The researchers applied transfer learning to
train a deep convolutional neural network in order to
identify three diseases and two types of pest damage. In
their work the best-trained model accuracies were 98%
for brown leaf spot (BLS), 96% for red mite damage
(RMD), 95% for green mite damage (GMD), 98% for
cassava brown streak disease (CBSD), and 96% for
cassava mosaic disease (CMD) and the best model
achieved an overall accuracy of 93% for data not used in
the training process. Although the work used deep
learning approach to achieve the overall accuracy of 93%
when compared to traditional machine learning
approaches and also used transfer learning which offers a
fast, affordable, and easily deployable strategy for digital
plant disease detection but the work fails to address the
occurrence of cassava bacterial blight disease.
3. METHODOLOGY
The desktop system application was developed using the
MATLAB Application Designer and a mobile application
developed using android studio, the Java development kit, the
Java runtime environment, and the Android software
development Kit. The android application developed interacts
with the MATLAB model using the MATLAB Compiler
Software Development Kit. A 2 tier different architectures with
machine learning trained models were analyzed using
classification algorithms in MATLAB: the health diagnosis and
the disease detection for cassava plants. The models were
generated after the comparison of the performance of multiple
learning algorithms and focus on two major cassava diseases
found in Nigeria which are the Cassava Mosaic Disease and the 
International Journal of Computer Science and Software Engineering (IJCSSE), Volume 8, Issue 7, July 2019 168
O. Emuoyibofarhe et. al
Cassava Bacterial Blight disease. The model in the first tier of
the architecture (the health diagnosis model) used the Cubic
Support Vector Machine (CSVM) algorithm to classify the
given image of the cassava leaf as being diseased or healthy
while the model in the second tier of the architecture stipulate
the disease detection model by the Coarse Gaussian Support
Vector Machine (CGSVM) algorithm to detect which of
Cassava Mosaic Disease or Cassava Bacterial Blight disease is
present in the plant.
3.1 Model Development
The development of the machine learning model trained
process steps used are highlighted in Figure 1 and explained
Fig. 1. Machine Learning Model Training Process
3.1.1 Data Collection
The cassava leaf images were taken from thirteen field trips of
three Bowen University, Iwo cassava farms and collected
18,000 images of the cassava leaves as primary data with
commonly digital cameras of commercially acceptable
specifications. The images were collected at different times of
day morning, afternoon and evening, in order to increase the
data variation so that the model developed, will not be restricted
in accuracy to a particular time of day; the 18,000 collected
images were distributed into 6,000 for morning, 6,000 for
afternoon and 6,000 for evening images. All these images
comprise healthy cassava leaves, leaves with Cassava Mosaic
Disease and leaf with Cassava Bacterial Blight Disease at
different stages of symptom manifestation.
All the collected images were cleaned manually, preprocessed
and labelled in preparation for the training of the predictive
model. Figure 2, Figure 3 and Figure 4 show the sample of the
collected images.
Fig. 2. Sample Healthy Training Data
Fig. 3. Sample Blight Training Data
Fig.4. Sample Mosaic Training Data
3.1.2 Preprocessing
In this data cleaning process, irregular and poor images were
removed, the image size was normalized and the dataset was
made ready for training, also wrongly classified images were
reclassified and images with multiple diseases were placed in
the dataset of both diseases.
3.1.3 Feature Extraction
The bag of features methodology was used to transform the
input data images into features such as representative and 
International Journal of Computer Science and Software Engineering (IJCSSE), Volume 8, Issue 7, July 2019 169
O. Emuoyibofarhe et. al
descriptive attributes contained in the input data after the
preprocessed data. This extraction method was used for both
tier 1 and tier 2 of the architecture due to its remarkable
simplicity and impressive performance where several features
were extracted from the cleaned images used for the training of
the models in the 2 tiers of the system that lasted for a duration
of about 8 hours. Hence the pseudo code used for the feature
extraction is as stipulated by firstly Load image data into an
image data store object, then create a bag-of-features from the
image data store, encode the image as new features and finally
create a table using the encoded features.
In order to reduce the number of features that the algorithm
needs for the development of the model, a principal component
analysis (PCA) feature was introduced which is an in-built
MATLAB facility was used to trim down the thousands of
extracted features to 500 principal features for each tier of the
architecture. The models were trained in the MATLAB
environment using supervised learning for the features
extraction. Eventually resulted in the first tier having two data
classes labelled “Healthy” and “Unhealthy” while for the
second tier, the two data classes were labelled “Mosaic” and
“Blight”. Also for the experiment to run perfectly a range of
23 learning algorithms in 6 categories such as discriminant
analysis, logistic regression Classifiers, support vector
machines, nearest neighbour classifiers, ensemble classifiers
and decision trees) were trained for both tiers of the
architecture. Multiple algorithms were trained so that a
comparison can be made in search of the choice of the best
algorithm. Five (5)-fold cross- validation was employed in
testing the model. Cross-validation was preferred to holdout
validation because it gives the model the opportunity to train on
multiple train-test splits which gives a better indication of how
well the model performs on unseen data whereas the holdout
method uses a single train-test split and the score depends on
how the data is split into train and test sets.
We analyzed the accuracy of the training of the final layer
developed using MATLAB for the new cassava image datasets
with the two different architectures by considering the
following metrics: where TP stands as the true positives, FP
stands as the false positives, FN stands as the false negatives
and TN stands as the true negatives.
Hence to calculate the accuracy of the model, we will have the
overall ratio of rightly predicted values (true positives and true
negatives) to the total population accuracy to be

 
TP TN FP FN
TP TN Accuracy
  


To minimize false negatives that is the number of times a
diseased model is classified as healthy, then the recall
sensitivity prediction accuracy was used to calculate actual
positives and false negatives when not to be tolerated and
which formula is

TP FN
TP call Sensitivity ediction

Re Pr 
Furthermore to minimize false positives that is the number of
times a healthy model is classified as diseased, then the
precision formula was used to calculate the performance
indicator about positive predictions and when false positives
cannot be tolerated, which formula is

TP FP
TP ecision

Pr 
Also for F-Score which is the harmonic mean of recall and
precision and a balance between recall and precision which was
a suitable alternative to accuracy. It is calculated by:

 call ecision
call ecision F Score
Re *Pr
2*Re *Pr
 
Similarly, AUC-ROC, where AUC refers as the Area Under
Curve and ROC, is Receiver Operating Characteristics. AUCROC curve is a performance measurement for classification
problem at various thresholds settings. The ROC curve
summarizes each confusion matrix that each threshold produces
and also helps to find the optimal threshold for the model based
on the level of false positives or false negatives tolerable to the
problem being considered. The larger the area under the ROC
curve, the better the algorithm performance. Hence the
formulas are shown below:
The True Positive Rate (TPR) is calculated by:

TP FN
TP TPR

 and
The False Positive Rate (FPR) is calculated by:

TN FP
FP FPR


The ROC curve is plotted with True Positive Rate (TPR)
against the False Positive Rate (FPR) where TPR is on y-axis
and FPR is on the x-axis.
3.1.4 System Testing
The developed mobile application system was taken for live
field testing to different cassava plants in order to evaluate and
examine the validity of the work developed at different times of
day- morning, afternoon and evening. From the testing analysis,
we discovered that some of the plants were healthy, some had
Cassava Mosaic Disease (CMD) while some are Cassava
Bacterial Blight Disease (CBBD). Thereby allowing the plants
in all of these categories to adequately detected.
3.2 System Architecture
The system developed from the MATLAB models is a 2 tier
system where the first level detects if the disease is healthy or
not and the second tier detects which of the diseases the plant
suffers from- either Cassava Mosaic Disease (CMD) or Cassava
Bacterial Blight Disease (CBBD).
As shown in the architectural diagram on figure 3.5, the system
takes visual input from the camera and sends it the systems
model for the dataset training in order to check the health status
or state and the types of disease that is affecting the cassava
leaf. Thereafter, it reports its responses.
International Journal of Computer Science and Software Engineering (IJCSSE), Volume 8, Issue 7, July 2019 170
O. Emuoyibofarhe et. al

Fig. 5. System Architecture
A Unified Modelling Language (UML) diagram that shows the
actors in the system with their different functions performance
and interactions among the elements of the system is shown in
figure 6. From the diagram, it shows the single actor “User” and
the interactions with the system.
Fig. 6. ULM Diagram of the cassava disease detection System
4. RESULT
In order to put up the newly developed system into operation
(using the approach that was stated in the methodology and also
to achieve the objectives of this research, the theoretical design
into a working system was converted and components of the
system were also tested and evaluated using the hardware
specifications which includes a laptop or desktop (64 bit) with
Random Access Memory of 8GB minimum, Intel Core i5 CPU
2.40GHz minimum , Camera (20 megapixels minimum) and
50mm Lens minimum and software requirements for the
development of the systems which also includes Windows
Operating System 10 and MATLAB 2018.
4.1 Results from the Feature Extraction
 Fig. 7. Health Feature Extraction Result
This shows that 1,265,804 features were extracted from the
images used in training the model to predict the health of the
plant as shown in the screenshot.
Fig. 8. Disease Feature Extraction Result
1,129,538 features were also extracted from images used in
training the model used to detect the exact disease of the plant
as shown in the screenshot in figure 8
:
International Journal of Computer Science and Software Engineering (IJCSSE), Volume 8, Issue 7, July 2019 171
O. Emuoyibofarhe et. al
Fig. 9. Sample Plot of Bag of Features
Features for both health classification and disease classification
were extracted using the Bag of Features feature extraction
method. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was then used in
grouping the related features into 500 and reduce the bag of
features to contain only 500 predictors. A sample of the bag of
features is shown in figure 9.

Fig. 10. Health Classification Algorithms and their Respective
Accuracies
The health classification model detects whether or not the
image of the leaf given is healthy. It uses 500 principal
components extracted during the feature extraction stage as
predictors and it gives a 2 class response (“Healthy” or
“Unhealthy”). In the model development process, 23 machine
learning algorithms were trained in MATLAB and the most
accurate model, which was a Cubic Support Vector Machine
(SVM), was exported in figure 10.
Fig. 11. Health Classification Model (Cubic SVM) Details
This displays that the Cubic Support Vector Machine model
had an accuracy of 83.9% using 5-fold cross-validation and a
prediction speed of about 690 objects/second.
Fig. 12. Health Classification Model (Cubic SVM) Scatter Plot
The scatter plot depicting the correct and incorrect predictions
shown in figure 12 reveals that the majority of the correct
predictions fall directly on the vertical or horizontal line
perpendicular to the origin (i.e. when the x-axis predictor and
the y-axis predictor are alternately equal to zero). This pattern
reveals an insight that can be used to simplify the prediction
into an equation of a line based on the two predictors.
International Journal of Computer Science and Software Engineering (IJCSSE), Volume 8, Issue 7, July 2019 172
O. Emuoyibofarhe et. al
Fig. 13. Health Classification Model (Cubic SVM) Confusion Matrix of
Number of Observations
From the results obtained from the numbers of observations for
each class the values then becomes from the health
classification confusion matrix displays shows that the true
positives for Healthy dataset are 1261 and false positives for
the healthy is 447 while true negatives for Unhealthy is 8240
and finally false negatives for Unhealthy is 1371 observations.
It is noted that the rationale for the decisions of large sample
size for the unhealthy at the instances of the high false negative
rate generated is to allow a disproportionately large sample size
for unhealthy instances and a high false negative rate so that
detection of the disease in the cassava plant which is the aim of
the work will be clearer and stated. This implies that the model
should be supplied with much more samples of the diseased
cassava leaf images so that better patterns for diseases that
appear on the leaf will be discovered. It is also a better decision,
in terms of potential yield loss, to classify healthy cassava as
being unhealthy than to leave an unhealthy cassava plant
without treatment because of the wrong classification of the
unhealthy plant as being healthy.
Fig. 14. Health classification model (Cubic SVM) confusion matrix of
true positive and false negative rates.
Figure 14 shows the true positive rates and the false negative
rates for both healthy and unhealthy predictions using the
(Cubic SVM)
Fig. 15. Health Classification Model (Cubic SVM) Confusion Matrix of
Positive
This describes the positive predicted value and the false
discovery rate for both healthy and unhealthy predictions using
the (Cubic SVM).
Fig. 16. Health Classification Model (Cubic SVM) ROC Curve
This describes the area under the receiver operating
characteristics curve (AUC ROC) which is 0.85 which implies
that with an 85% as the value from the Cubic SVM model, the
system can differentiate between a healthy class and an
unhealthy class.
4.2 Disease Classification Model Development
using (Coarse Gaussian SVM) model
The disease classification model detects the types of the disease
within the cassava dataset (i.e., the whole leaf) and considers
unhealthy or the healthy ones in the classification model, and
uses 500 principal components extracted during the feature
extraction stage as predictors and also gives 2 class response
(“Blight” or “Mosaic”). 
International Journal of Computer Science and Software Engineering (IJCSSE), Volume 8, Issue 7, July 2019 173
O. Emuoyibofarhe et. al
Fig. 17. Disease Classification Algorithms and their Respective
Accuracies
In the model development process, 23 machine learning
algorithms were trained in MATLAB and the most accurate
model, which was a Coarse Gaussian Support Vector Machine
(SVM) was exported in figure 17 above.
Fig. 18. Disease Classification Model (Coarse Gaussian SVM) Details
This displays that the Coarse Gaussian Support Vector Machine
model had an accuracy of 61.3% when 5-fold cross-validation
and a prediction speed of about 560 objects/second was used.

Fig. 19. Disease Classification Model (Coarse Gaussian SVM) Scatter
Plot
The scatter plot depicts the correct and incorrect predictions,
also reveals that the majority of the correct predictions fell
directly on the vertical or horizontal line perpendicular to the
origin (i.e. when the x-axis predictor and the y-axis predictor
are alternately equal to zero) and the others fell in a straight line
with different slopes.
Fig. 20. Disease Classification Model of Confusion Matrix for the
Number of observations
From the results obtained from the number of observations for
each class, it shows that both the false negatives and false
positives values are high due to the recurrence of images of
leaves with both diseases (Blight and Mosaic) in the dataset.
Also have the values of the observations to be true positives for
Blight is 3624 while false positives for Blight is 2237 then true
negatives for Mosaic is 2668 and finally false negatives for the
unhealthy is 1679.
Fig. 21. Disease Classification Model of Confusion Matrix for True
Positive and False Negative Rates
The true positive rates and the false negative rates for both
healthy and unhealthy predictions are displayed 
International Journal of Computer Science and Software Engineering (IJCSSE), Volume 8, Issue 7, July 2019 174
O. Emuoyibofarhe et. al
Fig. 22. Disease Classification Model of Confusion Matrix for Positive
Predicted Values and False Discovery Rates.
The positive predicted value and the false discovery rate for
both healthy and unhealthy predictions is shown from the
screenshot of the result.
Fig. 23. Disease Classification Model (Coarse Gaussian SVM) ROC
Curve
The area under the receiver operating characteristics curve
(AUC ROC) is 0.66 and with the 66% obtained the model can
differentiate between an instance of cassava mosaic disease and
cassava blight disease.
3.2 The General Workings of the System
The Cassava Disease Detection model has been deployed on a
desktop application. The graphical user interface of the
application was developed using the MATLAB application
designer package. The Cassava Disease Detection Software has
the following screenshot results.
The Home Page
Fig. 24. The Home Page
The home page contains a splash screen introducing the
application and an option to proceed to the disease detection
page. The purpose of this page is to add aesthetic value that
makes the application both branded and user-friendly
The Disease Detection Page
Fig. 25. Disease Detection Default Page
The Disease Detection page allows for image selection after
which the features of each image is extracted and a class
prediction is performed using both tiers of the application
(health classification and disease classification). Also shows the
default state of the disease detection page. Clicking the “Home”
button returns you to the home page (figure 24) while the “Load
Images” button pops up the prompt to select images to be used
in the validation dataset (figure 26) 
International Journal of Computer Science and Software Engineering (IJCSSE), Volume 8, Issue 7, July 2019 175
O. Emuoyibofarhe et. al
Fig. 26. Disease Detection Load Images Interface
Fig. 27: Disease Detection Page Feature Extraction Process in
MATLAB
The features of the images selected for validation are extracted
before the prediction is done based on these features. The result
of the feature extraction of a sample validation image is shown
in figure 27.
Fig. 28. Disease Detection Page Sample Prediction
When the folder containing the validation data is selected and
the image features extracted, the images therein and their
respective predictions are shown as illustrated in figure 28.
5. CONCLUSION
In recent times, researchers have made a number of efforts
towards the development of an intelligent system for the
detection of diseases in all human and agricultural sphere, but
the proposed system is developed only for the training of
machine learning model that will be used to detect cassava
disease. This study have demonstrated that with the
development of a cubic support vector machine model having
an accuracy of 83.9%, the leaf image will predict the status
whether it is healthy or unhealthy and also with a Coarse
Gaussian Support Vector Machine with an accuracy of 61.6%
that was developed will classify the disease as either Blight or
Mosaic. Hence, the purpose of this research which is to develop
a trained machine learning system that detects the Cassava
Mosaic Disease (CMD) and the Cassava Bacterial Blight
Disease (CBBD) when compared with manual disease detection
method for cassava diseases. This can also be deployed on other
platforms using a web server, an unmanned aerial vehicle/drone,
etc